Buenos Aires

Resiliente

1

RESILIENT BUENOS AIRES
Government Authorities of the City of Buenos Aires

Chief of Government
Horacio Rodríguez Larreta

Deputy Chief of Government 
Diego Santilli

Chief of Staff
Felipe Miguel

Secretary General and International Relations
Fernando Straface

Undersecretary of Strategic Management and Institutional Quality
Álvaro Herrero

Undersecretary of International and Institutional Relations
Francisco Resnicoff

General Director of Strategic Management and Chief Resilience Officer
David Groisman

Produced by  

The Resilient Buenos Aires Team
David Groisman
María Victoria Boix
Martina Ferrarino
Nicolás Ferme
Milagros Bayá Gamboa
Florencia Famularo

In cooperation with
Comité interministerial de resiliencia
ARUP
100 Resilient Cities

Design
Rodrigo Martínez Ruiz

Translation
Fernanda Font

Contact
http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/resiliencia
secretariageneral@buenosaires.gob.ar 

Edition
September 2018

Resilient  
Buenos Aires

3

Index

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

1.  Elaboration Process
2. How to Read the Strategy
3. Cross-Cutting Themes

1. City Profile
2. Shocks and Stresses of the City of Buenos Aires

 
 
 
 

 

    

 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
1. 100 Resilient Cities Initiative
2. What is Urban Resilience?
3. City Resilience Framework and Resilience Qualities

 
Letters 
 
Executive Summary 
 
Resilient Buenos Aires Vision 
Introduction 
 
 
 
 
Context and Challenges of Buenos Aires 
 
 
Development of the Resilience Strategy                                                                 
 
 
 
Resilient Buenos Aires                                                                                                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Next Steps 
Annexes   
 
Acknowledgements 
 
Bibliography 

Pillar 1: Diversity, gender and coexistence                                                                       
1.1  Transform Buenos Aires into a city that promotes women’s full development
 
 
1.2. Recognize and promote diversity as an identity value of the City
Pillar 2: Innovation, talent and opportunities                                                                    
 
 
 
Pillar 3: Environment and sustainability                                                                    
 
 
 
Pillar 4: Social and urban integration                                                                                       
 
4.1  Improve access to quality housing for all neighbors of the City
 
4.2 Promote sustainable mobility and a metropolitan cross-modal system
 
4.3 Design a people-oriented city which promotes coexistence and enjoyment      
Pillar 5: Security and risk management                                                                              
 
 
 

5.1 Foster citizens who are informed, prepared and aware of the challenges they face 
5.2 Prepare the City to face the impacts of climate change 
5.3 Drive innovation and technology to build safer spaces

3.1  Develop an integrated green infrastructure system                         
3.2 Promote the City’s energy sustainability
3.3 Implement a comprehensive waste management policy 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 

2.1  Guarantee inclusive quality education providing students the skills required by the jobs of the future
2.2 Promote learning opportunities that favor access to quality jobs
2.3 Foster innovation and generation of opportunities for economic development of the City 
    

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

6
13
15
17

23 

31

39

57

79

97

119 

133
135
141
143

5

Letters

Horacio Rodríguez Larreta,  
Chief of Government of the City of Buenos Aires
 
For more than 10 years, we have been working to continue building an open government in the City, based on the 
pillars of planning, proximity and teamwork with neighbors. We work every day to make Buenos Aires a city on 
a human scale, to enjoy and to assure the integration of all its residents, regardless of where they live – a place 
where we can all develop our full potential, with creativity and innovation.

This city vision accompanies the deep changes that are unfolding globally, with cities from all over the world 
having a higher profile to deal with the new challenges of development: climate change, migrations, changes in 
the labor market and the integration with new technologies that reach large cities first and affect those who live 
in them.

Within this context, the Resilience Strategy of Buenos Aires emerges as a response to the great challenges 
of the urban agenda, getting aligned with our City vision and proposing a path of inclusive and sustainable 
development that prepares us today, for the challenges of the future.

This strategy is the result of teamwork with a great number of stakeholders: residents, representatives from civil 
society organizations, academia, private sector leaders and government officials. Because we are convinced that 
the best solutions are those generated when the government listens and works close with neighbors, opening 
and sharing information to co-create the solutions to the challenges we have.

Furthermore, throughout all this process we also had the crucial support from the 100 Resilient Cities Network, of 
which Buenos Aires is member since 2016. This helps us to learn from the experiences of others and to look for 
solutions to the problems shared by large cities in the world. 

Our Resilience Strategy is guided by the vision of being an integrated city, with public areas to enjoy, anticipating 
risks and getting ready. A city of talents, that innovates in education and bets today on the jobs of the future, 
committing to gender equity, diversity and sustainability.

We are convinced that residents are the true capital of a city. Therefore, we focus our strategy on them, on 
improving their quality of life. We believe that the only way of building resilience is by guaranteeing the same 
opportunities to all neighbors. For this reason, we are the first city that includes a theme that bets on talent and 
innovation as engine for development and integration, and a priority theme to reach gender equality. 

Today the world looks at cities and demands them to lead the great social and economic changes that lie ahead. 
Resilience as a development strategy is a chance to weigh our opportunities towards the future, to recognize and 
anticipate the challenges to build a more prepared city where all residents can live better. 

7

Michael Berkowitz,  
President of 100 Resilient Cities 
 
On behalf of the entire team of 100 Resilient Cities, I would like to congratulate the city of Buenos Aires, the Chief 
of Government, Horacio Rodríguez Larreta, the Secretary General and International Relations, Fernando Straface 
and the Chief Resilience Officer, David Groisman, for the launch of Resilient BA, a milestone for the city and our 
partnership. This ambitious strategy consolidates the condition of Buenos Aires as a leading and innovative city 
at a global level and establishes a clear vision to build resilience in the face of the challenges of the XXI Century.

Since its foundation in 1580 on the south coast of the Río de la Plata river, the port of Buenos Aires has been the 
point of arrival of significant groups coming mainly from Europe, which provided the cultural eclecticism that is 
reflected in the city’s architecture, music and gastronomy.

Buenos Aires is the largest urban node in Argentina and the main political, economic and institutional center of 
the country. With a rich culture, a great quality of life and human talent, the Argentine capital has become a center 
of attraction for youth and adults from all the region, leading to an important population growth.

The City of Buenos Aires comprises a wide spectrum of geographies, conditions and communities that pose 
different  challenges  and  opportunities.  The  complexity  of  Buenos  Aires  requires  a  vision  with  nuances  and 
leadership.  That  is  the  vision  of  this  strategy,  whose  scope  and  scale  will  leverage  the  city’s  strengths  and 
systems to build a more resilient urban ecosystem. The strategy addresses the main challenges faced by the 
City, from chronic stresses, like the difficulty of access to housing, informal settlements and insecurity, to shocks 
associated mainly to the effects of climate change, such as heat waves or powerful storms.

Based on the great progress and the innovative work already achieved by the City, Buenos Aires’ Resilience 
Strategy consists of 5 pillars, 14 strategic objectives and 60 initiatives that will help consolidate this vision. It was 
a great civic engagement effort, jointly developed by different areas of government, citizens, academia and the 
private sector.

The strategy contains plans with the potential of transforming the city, such as the urban and social integration of 
its neighborhoods, the new conception of city through its new urban planning and building codes that respond to 
the population increase, and the development of the most ambitious hydraulic plans in the last 30 years. It is also 
committed to fostering talent and diversity as values for social cohesion. It is a visionary strategy that promotes 
new formats of teaching and learning, makes use of technologies and promotes entrepreneurship, in order to 
generate a better prepared society for the needs of the economy and the jobs of the future. 

Buenos  Aires  has  given  way  to  great  cultural  changes  and  public  policies  that  have  built  a  more  egalitarian 
society. Gender equity is a cross-cutting perspective reflected in several initiatives of this document. At the 
same time, this strategy demonstrates the city’s commitment to the environment, fosters the creation of green 
spaces and sustainable buildings, promotes a comprehensive waste management system in coordination with 
its metropolitan area, including the infrastructure development of waste collection, transport and final disposal 
systems, as well as the use of energy from 

This strategy reflects the dedication and leadership of the Chief Resilience Officer, David Groisman, and his team. 
It also highlights the commitment and support from the Chief of Government, Horacio Rodríguez Larreta, crucial 
for the potential and effectiveness of this ambitious plan. The work is only beginning, and we are excited to take 
the next step in our partnership by cooperating in the implementation of this pioneering transforming strategy 
that will ensure a resilient future for Buenos Aires while boosting the resilience efforts globally.

Fernando Straface,  
Secretary General and International Relations of the City of Buenos Aires
 
The XXI century is the cities’ century. During the last decades, the world witnessed an unprecedented urbanization, 
and forecasts only confirm these trends for the coming years. This diagnosis is especially true for Argentina, 
where almost 90 percent of our population is urban.

The proximity of people, ideas, customs and cultures offered by cities is a fertile ground for innovation and is what 
can transform them into true engines of development for countries. 

Furthermore, the challenges of this century are largely urban: cities can be exposed to structural stresses and 
become more vulnerable to disruptive shocks if they do not have adequate planning for those trends. Therefore, 
the  current  international  scenario  demands  from  cities  concrete  actions  to  face  challenges  such  as  climate 
change or inequality, but also to lead the reforms to make cities the place of equal rights and opportunities 
between men and women, or to implement the necessary changes to transform the educational systems for the 
jobs of the future.

Today, the most important cities of the world are designing policies that prepare them to be resilient, sustainable 
and inclusive. It is a huge opportunity for local governments, and in Buenos Aires we are committed to guiding 
our work over the next few years through the resilience lens.

In this context, the City joined the100 Resilient Cities network in 2016 to come up with a development strategy 
that allows us to grow in a sustainable manner and prepare for the challenges of the future.

The Buenos Aires Resilience Strategy provides a holistic perspective to deal with the stresses the City is exposed 
to. On the one hand, our strategy addresses the issues of the “traditional agenda” of resilience which translates, 
for example, into the water risk reduction works, and the creation of new early warning systems that mitigate the 
risk of flooding and prepare the city for when they occur.

On the other hand, we seek to focus on a new agenda aimed at relieving chronic stresses in cities which are 
related to the economic and social changes that our societies are beginning to undergo. This new agenda is 
embodied  in  proposals  that  ponder  the  distinctive  character  of  Buenos  Aires  as  a  diverse  and  creative  city 
of talent, with top-level human capital recognized all over the world. Thus, this document presents concrete 
initiatives aimed at ensuring that all residents of our city have equal opportunities to develop their potential. 

In  this  sense,  one  of  the  flagship  initiatives  of  our  resilience  strategy  is  the  Gender  Indicators  System.  This 
system, the first at a subnational level in Latin America, provides statistical information with a gender perspective, 
which enables us to measure how we are performing and to come up with what needs to be done to achieve 
equal opportunities between men and women. 

Such initiatives provide our strategy with a distinctive and forefront character, because if the XXI century is the 
century of the cities, it is also the century of those who live in them. For this reason, we decided to focus our 
resilience strategy on people, so that it helps build a city where we can all fully develop our potential, promoting 
and attracting talent and innovation, driving diversity as engine for social cohesion. We want Buenos Aires to 
be a global city, with a worldwide reference agenda on how to prepare to face the challenges of the future in a 
resilient way.

9

David Groisman,  
General Director of Strategic Management and Chief Resilience Officer of the City
 
What does being a resilient city mean? On February 23, 2017, we posed this question to the attendees at the launch 
of the Resilient Buenos Aires Program. That day, representatives from all sectors gathered at the City Government 
Hall to discuss the novel concept of urban resilience and how to achieve it in Buenos Aires. The conclusions 
highlighted many of the government’s lines of action – some emblematic ones, such as the integration of Barrio 
31 (Neighborhood 31) – that contribute to building resilience. We were also able to identify our challenges, those 
aspects we must and can improve, and the strengths we want to reinforce.

This meeting was only the beginning of a path we pursued to develop the Resilience Strategy of the City of 
Buenos Aires. During this process, we drew on the opinions of experts and specialists in the urban world, worked 
with all areas of government and especially listened to residents, whose perceptions, ideas and proposals were 
included in this strategy. 

As a result of this work, we came up with the five pillars that make up our resilience strategy, which challenge 
and respond to the main factors that were identified as those that make us more vulnerable as a city: extreme 
weather phenomena product of climate change, difficulties in access to housing, changes in the labor market 
and gender inequalities, among others. 

Likewise, we decided to include three cross-cutting themes to obtain a more complete vision of resilience. These 
themes give our initiatives a differential as we seek to solve the metropolitan challenges of Buenos Aires in an 
integrated way, beyond its geographical boundaries, including the neighbors’ perspective, and betting on the 
generation and use of data and evidence to make better decisions. 

Thus, after a year and a half of work, we presented Buenos Aires’ Resilience Strategy, a development strategy that 
enriches the main lines of work of the City, adopting a holistic approach and focusing its proposals on people.

What does being a resilient city mean? For Buenos Aires, being resilient means looking at people and building 
a  city  to  their  scale.  It  means  integrating  our  neighborhoods  and  promoting  sustainable  growth,  in  harmony 
with the environment while anticipating risks. Being a resilient city also means betting on education innovation, 
training today the youth who will lead tomorrow’s jobs and leveraging talent. It means working for a coexistence 
based on diversity, guaranteeing to everyone the same opportunities to develop their potential.

At the Buenos Aires Resilience Office, we work so that this vision permeates the whole City - from its infrastructure 
and administration to its companies and leisure areas - including each inhabitant. We know we have a huge task 
ahead of us, but we also know that as a city we are up to meeting the challenge.

11

Executive Summary

The Resilient Buenos Aires program is a turning point in the design 
of public policies aimed at building the City we want. It is an exercise 
that allows us to confirm the direction we have been working on and, 
at the same time, to think today about a city that will be prepared for 
the challenges of the future. 

In a context of rapid changes and in an increasingly urban world, the 
growing challenges we face as a global city call on us to stop to design 
and plan a more resilient Buenos Aires. For Buenos Aires, the concept 
of  resilience  implies  focusing  its  strategy  and  planning  its  policies 
around the people and neighbors who live in and move around the 
City every day. Resilient Buenos Aires is the articulated construction of 
the City development strategy or 2030, in line with major international 
commitments, such as the Sustainable Development Goals and the 
New Urban Agenda.  

Buenos Aires’  Resilience  Strategy  stands out  because  it was  jointly 
developed  by  all  areas  of  the  City  Government,  together  with  civil 
society, academia, the private sector, and neighbors, with the support 
of the 100 Resilient Cities Network. It was a joint work whose product 
reflects the essence of how it was put together: the integration among 
sectors, the conjunction of visions and the proactivity of the initiatives 
stated in this document.

Resilient  Buenos  Aires  is  inspired  by  the  classic  concept  of  urban 
resilience  and  experiences  of  other  cities  of  the  world,  but  also 
seeks to leave its own mark. Thus, the city’s major milestones, such 
as the acknowledgement and social and urban integration of popular 
neighborhoods, the new conception of the city through its new urban 
planning and building codes, or the development of the most ambitious 
hydraulic plan in recent decades are part of this document.  There 
are also initiatives that make up the differential part of our strategy, 
centered on creating opportunities for the development of all people, 
such  as  promoting  innovation,  generating  and  attracting  talent, 
fostering diversity as the engine of social cohesion among residents, 
an ambitious and reference agenda regarding gender equality, or the 
commitment to the environment driven by cultural change.

Buenos Aires’ Resilience Strategy is divided into five pillars and three 
cross-cutting themes:

•  Diversity, gender and coexistence: a city that promotes equity in 
diversity, equality of opportunities, inclusion and coexistence of all its 
neighbors.

•  Innovation, talent and opportunities: a city that promotes equality 
of opportunities for all its neighbors, that anticipates the advances of 
the future and provides the conditions to develop their potential.

•  Environment  and  sustainability:  a  sustainable  city  that  seeks 
better  quality  of  life  for  its  neighbors,  committed  to  preserving  its 
environment and using its resources efficiently.

•  Social  and  urban  integration:  an  integrated  city,  without  barriers 
and on a human scale, that grows in a sustainable and balanced way.

•  Security  and  risk  management:  a  prepared  city,  aware  of  its 
challenges and willing to adapt. 

•  Cross-cutting themes: metropolitan vision, citizen participation and 
use of data and technology.

Resilient  Buenos  Aires  is  a  roadmap  of  the  City 
we  want  to  be,  including  latent  impacts,  chronic 
tensions and the opportunities we are facing today. 
Some of the initiatives that stem from this document 
are actions that we are already carrying out, but also 
integrated  action  proposals  with  multiple  benefits 
that  set  a  direction  and  show  the  world  the  vision 
we have for Buenos Aires. Through this strategy, we 
seek to build a more prepared city, which is able to 
anticipate  today  the  challenges  of  the  future,  with 
proposals that improve the quality of life of those of 
us who live and move around the City.

13

Resilient BA Vision

Buenos  Aires  will  be  a  worldwide  reference  in  the  promotion  and 
generation  of  talent.  A  City  that  integrates  its  neighborhoods  and 
enhances  its  leisure  areas,  anticipates  its  risks  and  gets  ready. 
It  innovates  in  education  and  bets  today  on  the  jobs  of  the  future, 
committing to gender equity, diversity and sustainability.

Pillars, Objectives and Initiatives

The strategy development is divided into 5 pillars: diversity, gender 
and  coexistence;  innovation,  talent  and  opportunities;  environment 
and  sustainability;  social  and  urban  integration;  security  and 
risk  management.  These  pillars  are  cut  crossed  by  three  themes 
that  complete  and  leverage  the  resilience  vision  of  the  strategy: 
metropolitan  vision,  citizen  participation  and  use  of  data  and 
technology.

The  pillars  are  subdivided  into  14  strategic  objectives  that  aim  at 
heading the way to the city we want, by applying the resilience lens to 
the great goals of the city. The objectives translate into 60 initiatives, 
proposals,  programs  and  plans  that  will  allow  us  to  build  a  more 
resilient Buenos Aires.

15

Introduction

17

Conveying the concept of resilience is difficult, even for cities. The conception of a resilient city is manifested 
when stresses or shocks threaten any of the city systems. The development of Buenos Aires’ resilience strategy 
helped define the implications of addressing the City’s challenges in a cross-cutting way. Drafting what “being 
resilient” means involved a joint work with all the stakeholders that live in the city. The development process 
implied, in turn, incorporating the value of resilience into the government, charting a way forward for the 
wellbeing of all City residents. 

1. 100 Resilient Cities Initiative 
 
Since 2016, the city of Buenos Aires has been part of the network of 
cities selected by the 100 Resilient Cities (100RC) program –pioneered 
by  the  Rockefeller  Foundation,  to  carry  out  an  urban  resilience 
strategy  that  addresses  the  challenges  posed  by  climate  change, 
urbanization and globalization. 100RC cooperates with cities all over 
the world to make them more resilient to their social, economic and 
physical challenges. The initiative supports the adoption of a resilience 
vision that includes both, the shocks of natural phenomena, such as 
earthquakes, floods or heat waves, as well as the stresses that weaken 
the structure of a city in a daily or cyclic way, and that may affect its 
normal development trajectory.

Thus,  the  network  provides  cities  with  technical  assistance  and 
resources, offering access to tools and to international contributors 
from  private  and  public  sectors  and  civil  society  organizations  that 

assist  in  the  development  and  implementations  of  their  resilience 
strategies. In addition, 100RC provides access to an exchange network 
among  cities  to  share  best  practices,  solve  problems  together  and 
learn from the experiences of others. Through these initiatives, cities 
conduct projects that promote and build resilience, encouraging the 
creation of urban resilience as a global practice, thus turning it into a 
core topic of the public agenda. 

Building resilience is managing the present of a city with a forward-
looking vision. Working on resilience enables us to build the future of 
the City so that we can adapt to the new challenges of the XXI century 
and transform them into growth and development opportunities for 
all its residents.

Strategy Development Process

Phase

01

DIAGNOSIS
Understand  the  city’s  resilience  challenges. 
Identify  the 
emerging  issues  that  will  be  analyzed  in  greater  depth  in  the 
next phase.

Outcome: Preliminary Resilience Assessment

DEVELOPMENT
Developing the Resilience Strategy: explore in greater detail 
the emerging issues of the city.

Activities articulated with internal and external stakeholders. 
Goals and practical initiatives that will form the final strategy.

Outcome: Resilience Strategy

Phase

02

Phase

03

IMPLEMENTATION
Implementing the initiatives identified in the Strategy.

Build greater resilience in systems and processes, guaranteeing 
the operation of the City.

Outcome: Resilient City

19

2. What Is Urban Resilience?

Resilience  is  a  term  that  emerges  from  the  field  of  ecology  in  the 
1970s to describe the capacity of a system to maintain or recover its 
functionality  in  the  event  of  disruption  or  disturbance  (ARUP,  2014). 
After  undergoing  several  reconversions,  the  term  is  adapted  today 
by  cities,  understood  as  complex  systems  that  constantly  adapt  to 
changes and circumstances.

The world is increasingly urban: according to the United Nations, in 
2050, 4 out of 5 people will live in urban areas. Their wellbeing relies on 
a complex web of interconnections among institutions, infrastructure 
and information. Citizens are drawn to cities as centers of economic 
activity,  opportunities  and  innovation.  But  cities  are  also  scenarios 

where stresses accumulate, and sudden shocks may result in social, 
physical or economic crises.

By  the  same  token,  city  resilience  is  defined  as  the  capacities  of 
individuals,  communities,  institutions,  businesses  and  systems 
within a city to survive, adapt and grow, no matter what types of 
chronic  stresses  and  acute  shocks  they  experience. It consists of 
preparing a city to avoid unforeseen challenges diverting it from its 
normal development trajectory. Ultimately, it is about improving the 
quality of life of city dwellers, focusing on the most vulnerable ones. 

City resilience is defined as the capacity of individuals, communities, institutions, 
businesses and systems within a city to survive, adapt and grow, no matter what kinds of 
chronic stresses and acute shocks they experience. 

3. City Resilience Framework and Resilient Qualities 

a  city  must  work  to  be  resilient,  in  other  words,  to  strengthen  its 
capacity  to  face  a  wide  variety  of  stresses  and  shocks.  The  CRF 
offers  a  comprehensive  perspective  that  allows  us  to  understand 
the  complexity  of  cities  and  the  areas  that  contribute  to  building 
resilience. 

To  progress  into  a  consistent  vision  of  what  resilience  and  the 
challenges  imply  to  cities  worldwide,  100RC  promotes  the  use 
of  a  City  Resilience  Framework  (CRF)  as  a  starting  point.  This 
methodological framework enables analyzing the existing information 
about a city to articulate its challenges and opportunities through a 
specific perspective. Thus, analyzing the different systems of a city 
through this methodological framework helps to assess its recovery 
capacities,  identify  critical  areas  and  strengths  to  enhance  and 
design  actions  and  programs  that  include  the  resilience  dividend, 
i.e., generate multiple benefits in different areas. Moreover, the CRF 
provides  a  common  language  that  enables  the  100  cities  of  the 
network and others that have been inspired by their work, to share 
knowledge and experiences.

The Resilience Framework consists of 4 categories, 12 goals and 52 
indicators  that  jointly  establish  the  crucial  environments  on  which 

F o s t e r s   L o n g - T e r m
I n t e g r a t e d   P l a n n i n g

&  

Meets
Basic Needs

E m powers a
Broad Range of
Stakeholders

CITY RESILIENCE 

FRAMEWORK

e
tiv
c
e
f
f

s
e
t
o
m
o
r
P

hip & E

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
M

s
r
e
d
a
e
L

P

P

r

r

o

M

o

v

t

i

a

e

d

n

c

e

-

t

s

m

i

 

a

v

&

e

 

S

u

p

p

&

 E

m

o
rt
s Liv

plo

y

m

elih

e

o

n
t

o

d

H

E

e

n

a

s

l

u

t

r

h

 

e

S

s

 

e

P

r

v

u

i

b

c

l

i

e

c

s

s

nitie

d
e
g
a
s
g
e
n
t
E
o
 
m
&
u
 
m
o
e
r
siv
m
P
o
e
C
h
o
C

d

 

E

e

N

n

 

a

h

A

t

s

u

a

s

r

n

e

a

c

t

l

e

 

s

&

s

C

o

ntin

E

n

S

s

u
r
e

uity of C

e
r
vic

s

e

s

ritic
al

Social Stability,
Security & Justice 
Ensure

Provides Reliable
Communication
& Mobility

F o s t e r s   E c o n o m i c

P r o s p e r

t y

i

1. Meet basic needs
2. Supports livelihood and employment
3. Ensures public health Services
4. Promotes cohesive and engaged communities
5. Ensure social stability, security and justice
6. Fosters economic prosperity
7. Provides and enhances protective natural and 
   manmade assets

8. Ensures continuity of critical services
9. Provides reliable communication and mobility
10. Promotes leadership and effective management
11. Empowers a broad range of stakeholders
12. Fosters long-term and integrated planning

21

Qualities of Resilient Systems

REFLECTIVE

Systems that learn from their experience and inform future decision 
making.

ROBUST

Systems designed, built and managed to withstand the shocks of 
threats without significant damage or loss of function.

REDUNDANT

Systems with idle capacity planned to respond to disruptions, extreme 
pressure or peaks of demand. 

FLEXIBLE

Systems that can change, evolve and adapt in response to changing 
circumstances.

RESOURCEFUL

Systems able to quickly find different methods to achieve their goals 
and respond to their needs during shock or stress.

INCLUSIVE

Systems that emphasize the need for consultation and commitment of 
the local society, including the most vulnerable groups.

INTEGRATED

Systems that behave in an articulated manner, aligned with decision 
makers.

A resilient urban system is one that can withstand, respond and better adapt to stresses and shocks, one that can bounce back faster and 
revitalize from disruptions.

Context and Challenges 
of Buenos Aires

23

Autonomous City of Buenos Aires

53% women
47% men
37,3% not native-born
26% under 19 years of age
21% 60 years or more

3 Million
people live in the 
City of Buenos Aires

7,6%
of the population lives 
in low-income 
neighborhoods

70%
of the population lives 
in water basins

The GGP
of the city

accounts for 18%

of the country

total

15
communes

203 km2

of area

Metropolitan Area of Buenos Aires

1st agglomeration of the country
37% of the population of 
the country

37%

500,000 
passengers per day/subway

11,3 milions
local and international tourists 
visited the city in 2017

6700 Tons
of solid urban waste are 
generated per day

7,2% unemployment rate 
in the city
9,8% unemployment rate 
among women
8,8% unemployment rate  
among young people 
(15 to 19 years of age)

13.285 km2

of area

14 M
of people

40 Municipalities 
and the City of 
Buenos Aires

50%
of the country’s 
GDP

25

1. City Profile

Map of Communes and 
Neighborhoods of CABA

The  City  of  Buenos  Aires  is  the  economic  and  political  capital  of 
Argentina.  It  is  the  most  populated  city  of  the  country  and  the 
second metropolitan region in South America, after São Paulo, Brazil. 
With  the  constitutional  reform  of  1994,  the  City  gained  autonomy 
and  abandoned  its  denomination  of  “Federal  Capital”  to  become 
the  “Autonomous  City  of  Buenos  Aires”  (CABA,  for  its  acronym  in 
Spanish). This reform gave the district a special political administrative 
status  that  differentiates  it  from  other  municipalities  and  Argentine 
provinces. It also allows residents of the City to elect their Chief of 
Government directly.  Additionally, since 2005, the City is organized in 
15 decentralized political and administrative units called Communes.

Metropolitan Area of Buenos Aires
The  General  Paz  Avenue  and  the  Riachuelo  river  serve  as  physical 
boundaries and divide the City from the province of Buenos Aires. In 
turn, they delimit the City from the 7 bordering municipalities of the 
40 districts that make up the urban sprawl and the Metropolitan Area 
of Buenos Aires (AMBA, for its acronym in Spanish). The city area is of 
203 km2 and accounts for only 5.2% of the urban sprawl that extends 
beyond the limits of the district towards AMBA. The City is 5 times 
denser than the average in AMBA (almost 15,111 people per km2).

The AMBA urban sprawl extends from Campana to La Plata, limited 
by the Río de la Plata and Provincial Route 6, with a surface of 13,325 
km2.  According  to  the  2010  census,  it  has  14,800,000  inhabitants 
that account for 37% of Argentina’s total population. Unlike the city 
of Buenos Aires that has maintained a stable population since 1947, 
AMBA keeps growing: between 2001 and 2010 its population grew by 
14% to reach almost 10 million inhabitants.

towards the service economy, where it accounts for 83% of the Gross 
Geographic Product (GGP). The City port channels 70% of the imports 
to the country, moving almost 11 million tons of goods per year. In turn, 
more than 50% of the country’s exports regarding services originate 
in the City, reaching over 7 billion dollars in 2016. Furthermore, more 
than half of ICT companies are based in the City, positioning it as a 
potential regional hub. 

While the AMBA region represents 50% of the country’s Gross Domestic 
Product  (GDP),  the  city  itself  accounts  for  23%  of  the  country  total 
(INDEC, 2017). The productive profile of the City is highly specialized 

GGP Composition by Services 

The City’s GGP accounts for: 

18%
of the national GDP

7%
others

10%
industry

83%
services, commerce,
transport and communications,
banks and insurance companies

GGP Composition by Services
7,3%
community services
8,7%
social services and health
6,7%
education
13,7%
public administration
25,1%
real estate

1,3%
others

4,8%
hotels and restaurants

15,3%
transport & 
communications
17%
finance

Source: Own calculation based on data from the General Directorate of Statistics and Censuses (DGEyC for its acronym in Spanish) for 2016.

27

The administrative structure of the metropolitan area is not integrated 
in one single unit. This reflects a complex institutional and political 
framework maintained throughout its history. Unlike other metropolitan 
areas made up by different local districts in one same state, AMBA 
stands  out  for  consisting  of  two  jurisdictions  of  a  provincial  level. 
Although  there  is  no  consolidated  metropolitan  governance  body 
that integrally coordinates the challenges of AMBA, several agencies 
and dependencies were created to deal with key issues for resilience 
across jurisdictions1.    

The central role of the city of Buenos Aires within the urban system 
of Argentina and the region (especially AMBA) makes it an attractive 
hub  for  the  population,  whether  as  daily  commuters,  residents  or 
migrants.  This  centrality  is  due  to  the  city’s  educational  quality,  its 
hospital  equipment  and  the  international  prestige  of  its  physicians, 

Expansion of Buenos Aires Urban Sprawl

the economic activity, the quality of the urban services and for being 
host  of  the  national  and  international  cultural  arena.  However,  this 
growing demand poses strong pressures to the local urban system 
by increasing the economic and social costs related to the access to 
goods and services in the City.

At the same time, the fact that the three levels of government - Federal, 
Provincial and CABA- are politically aligned as of 2015 has created new 
possibilities to manage sectorial policies in AMBA.

While the population growth of the City has stagnated, its demographic 
structure  has  tended  to  change,  and  the  size  of  households  has 
reduced  (single-person  households  have  increased  by  almost  25% 
over the household total since the 1980s). Also, the population aged 
65 or over, went from representing 5.3% in 1947 to almost 17% in 2016, 
and is projected to reach 20.3% by 2040. 

As far as socio-economic inequality, the City experiences the same 
challenges  as  large  global  cities.  Geographically,  there  is  a  more 
developed  northern  area  and  a  southern  one  with  higher  levels  of 
vulnerability. This is where almost all the low-income neighborhoods 
concentrate,  known  as  shanty  towns.  These  are  settlements  of 
improvised self-built housing on fiscal or private lands, where residents 
lack  formal  access  to  urban  utilities  and  ownership  rights  over  the 
land. Although the City is strongly working to formalize and integrate 
these neighborhoods, inequality not only exists inside their territory, 
but also deepens due to the clear differences with the municipalities 
of the AMBA region to the south and southeast.

Source: Ministry of Urban Development and Transport (MDUyT)

1.  Some sector-specific examples: regarding mobility, the Metropolitan Transport Agency; regarding waste, the state-owned company for Ecological Coordination in 
the Metropolitan Area (CEAMSE for its acronym in Spanish); in matters of watershed management, the Matanza-Riachuelo River Basin Authority, the Reconquista River 
Committee, the Luján River Committee, and regarding urban procurement, the Central Market.

2. Shocks and Stresses of the City of Buenos Aires

A  resilient  city  is  one  that  is  prepared  to  respond  to  the  disruptive 
effects of sudden shocks and chronic stresses. Through participatory 
work,  bibliography  review  and  interviews  to  key  stakeholders,  we 
identified and analyzed the main shocks and stresses that affect the 
city of Buenos Aires, to which the Resilience Strategy seeks to address.  

The  main  shocks  that  threaten  the  City  are  mainly  due  to  climate 
change effects: extreme meteorological phenomena increasingly more 
recurrent generate disruptive events associated to floods caused by 
storms and heat waves.

To respond to the effects of climate change, this Resilience Strategy 
seeks to delve into infrastructures that promote adapting the way in 
which  the  city  is  built,  by  promoting  criteria  of  urban  sustainability, 
strengthening  the  City’s  hydraulic  system,  including  biodiversity 
principles  and  creating  new  green  areas.  Buenos  Aires’  strategy  is 
people-centered:  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  climate  change,  the  City 
will  work  on  generating  a  communication  that  builds  a  culture  of 
preparedness  to  empower  residents  so  that  they  can  respond  and 
emerge stronger after disruptive situations.

Buenos Aires, like any other large city, is exposed to important chronic 
stresses. Among these are the inadequate provision of infrastructure 
and  public  services  in  low-income  neighborhoods,  the  difficulty  in 
access  to  housing  and  the  regeneration  of  public  space  for  leisure. 
To  promote  resilience,  the  City  has  embarked  in  an  important  urban 
integration  process  of  low-income  neighborhoods,  emphasizing  their 
social  integration  by  fostering  opportunities,  recreation  and  culture. 
At  the  same  time,  it  encourages  sustainable  mobility,  through  active 
mobility and prioritization of public transport.  

The imminent changes in the labor market involve reshaping the way 
we conceive education and labor insertion. We need to anticipate the 
challenges of the future and create the necessary skills so that residents 
can work on jobs that have not yet been created. By promoting talent, 
incorporating and developing new skills from the educational system, 
the  City  will  work  to  address  the  rapid  changes  without  neglecting 
those who can be affected by the labor market turnaround. There are 
also challenges related to the new digital and collaborative economies 
and the way they can impact on the regular functioning of the city. In 
this sense, the strategy proposes a way to anticipate those disruptions 
and promotes a search for solutions or a harmonic acceptance of these 
new economies.

A resilient city is one that includes diversity and promotes inclusion. 
Faced with the challenges of gender inequity and social discrimination, 
we will work to empower women, celebrate differences as a value of the 
city, and promote coexistence and dialogue. We seek to support those 
who want to come to the City to study and work, so that they can develop 
their talent. Therefore, we propose to create equal opportunities for all 
the people who live and move around our city so that they can fully 
develop their potential.  

A  resilient  city  is  one  that  focuses  on  people  and  builds  according 
to  their  scale,  promotes  their  talent  and  recreation,  adapts  to  their 
historical challenges, and prepares for those of the future. 

Difficulties in
access to housing
CLIMATE CHANGE

Lack of
social cohesion
Traffic congestion and metropolitan mobility
Access to green spaces
UNEVEN LAND DEVELOPMENT
Floods, heat
waves and
power
outages 

Gender
inequality
Rapid changes
in the labor
market

Regulation of
new digital and
collaborative
economies

29

Development of the 
Resilience Strategy 

31

1. Elaboration Process
 
The development and implementation of Buenos Aires’ Resilience Strategy is an opportunity to thoughtfully consider and generate innovative 
and  collective  solutions  that  enable  the  city  to  be  better  prepared  to  respond  to  acute  shocks,  overcome  stresses,  manage  current 
problems  and  face  future  challenges.  The  diagram  below  shows  the  process  carried  out  by  the  City  to  develop  its  Resilience  Strategy  
(for more information about the drafting process see “Appendix” on page 135).

8 

focus groups  
with City of 
Buenos Aires’ 

residents

50

Interviews 

with key stakehol-
ders from public & 

private sectors 
and civil society

Buenos Aires 
Joins the 100 
RC Network

Creation of 
the 
Resilience 
Council

Launching of 
Buenos Aires’ 
Resilience 
Strategy

1

social 

vulnerability 

map to 
disasters

3 

special studies 
with local and 
international 

partners

1800 

analyzed projects 
of the Government’s 

Comprehensive 

Management

Plan

530 
ideas

co-created 

Discovery 
Areas 
Definition 
Workshop

Participation 
in the NYC 
100 RC 
Summit

Preliminary 
Resilience 
Assessment

Participation 
in Workshop 
on Climate 
Action and 
Urban 
Resilience

Development 
of Phase II. 
Scope of Work 
(SOW)

1200 
neighbors 
surveyed

Cooperation 
Agreement 
between 
Buenos Aires 
and 100 RC 
Network

MAY
2016

JANUARY

2017

FEBRUARY 

2017

MAY
2017

JUNE
2017

AUGUST

2017

SEPTEMBER

2017

OCTOBER

2017

NOVEMBER

2017

PHASE 1:
RESILIENCE DIAGNOSIS
- Workshop to identify shocks and stresses.
- Understanding the City resilience challenges.
- Identifying emerging themes (Discovery Areas).

PHASE 2:
DEVELOPMENT OF THE RESILIENCE STRATEGY
- In-depth exploration of emerging issues of the City.
- Development of articulated activities with stakeholders from 
different sectors.
- Elaboration of specific studies on sustainable construction, 
teachers of the future, and green walls and roofs for schools.

+ 10

meetings of the 

Resilience 

Council

3

cross-cutting 

themes

+ 300
participants 
in ideation 
workshops

+ 500
proposals

183 
prioritized 
projects

3
pilot 
projects

60 
resilient 
initiatives

5

pillars

32

resilience 
connections

Launch of Buenos 
Aires’ Resilience 
Strategy

Pilot project: 
Risk 
Management 
in schools

Pilot project: 
Mobility and 
Gender 
Participatory 
Mapping in 
Barrio 31

Start of 
agreement 
with AVINA 
and MIF

Workshop on 
Opportunities 
(FOO)

Pilot project 
with Oracle: 
“Chatbots 
for Good”

3 sectorial 
workshops

5 ideation 
instances

8

thematic 
workshops

Participation 
in the 
Network 
Exchange 
Program on 
Metropolitan 
Governance 
in Chile

DECEMBER

2017

MARCH
2018

APRIL
2018

MAY
2018

JUNE
2018

JUNE 13 AND 14

2018

AUGUST

2018

SEPTEMBER

2018

PHASE 3:
IMPLEMENTATION
- Implement the initiatives of the Resilience Strategy.
- Apply resilience to systems and processes of the City.
- Showcase Buenos Aires’ resilience construction internationally. 

33

2. How to Read the Strategy
 
The Buenos Aires Resilience Strategy consists of 5 pillars, 14 strategic 
objectives and 60 initiatives. Each pillar responds to the shocks and 
stresses detected through the Preliminary Resilience Assessment and 
the activities carried out on Phase 2. In this respect, the Resilience 
Strategy reflects the vision and aspirations of the City.

The pillars enable structuring the main lines of work the City already 
has  underway  in  its  government  plan,  enriching  it  by  means  of  the 
resilience lens. It also has 3 cross-cutting themes that complement 
and reinforce the City’s vision for the future.

The  pillars  are  structured  around  strategic  objectives  that  define 
specific actions to achieve goals. Within each strategic objective there 
is a series of initiatives that embody resilience in the City. Many of 
these initiatives are linked to several objectives and to other pillars, 
which gives meaning to the cross-cutting concept of the strategy. On 

the other hand, the resilience strategy complements with the UN 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development. The strategic objectives set out 
therein, promote compliance of the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs). The linkage between the strategic objectives and the SDGs is 
indicated on each pillar’s cover.

At  the  same  time,  each  initiative  contains  a  brief  description  of 
the  proposal  and  the  resilience  dividend  of  each  action,  its  status, 
implementation timeframe (short, medium or Long-term), responsible 
parties  and  main  stakeholders  involved.  The  100RC  Network  cities 
that served as inspiration for each initiative and whose good practices 
will contribute in the implementation phase are also mentioned. The 
actions have monitoring proposals or shock indicators to measure the 
implementation progress. The contribution of each strategic objective 
to the SDGs defined by the United Nations is also detailed.

Title of the initiative

Timeframe

Status

Stakeholders involved

Cross-cutting themes

Pillars to which it 
contributes

Qualities

Shocks and stresses 
to which it responds

Strategic objective

Initiative description

Stakeholders involved

Linked actions

Image related to the 
initiative

Representative Icon 
of each Pillar

3. Cross-cutting Themes

The  cross-cutting  themes  are  perspectives  that  underpin  the  City’s 
vision of the future and go through each pillar of the strategy. They also 
contribute to a more complete understanding of the pillars’ relevance 
from a new vision. These are: metropolitan vision, citizen participation, 
and use of data and technology. These cross-cutting elements are a 

distinctive differential of the initiatives described, since they seek to 
solve the challenges of Buenos Aires in an integrated way, beyond its 
geographic limits, by including the vision of the residents of Buenos 
Aires and using evidence-based decision making.

Metropolitan Vision
Coordination among the different levels of government is a fundamental challenge of the institutional fabric of the 
Metropolitan Area of Buenos Aires (AMBA for its acronym in Spanish) that has deepened as of the autonomy of the 
city of Buenos Aires in 1994. Like any large city, Buenos Aires has challenges that go beyond its jurisdictional limits 
and require a systemic and metropolitan approach. Challenges such as waste and watershed management, transport, 
health and education do not respect borders and reflect social stresses and potential shocks both, in the City as well 
as in the municipalities that make up the metropolitan area. Incorporating the metropolitan vision to the understanding 
of urban resilience in the city of Buenos Aires implies acknowledging a coordinated and joint approach. This is reflected 
by the strategy’s initiatives and actions that have an expanded vision of Buenos Aires’ challenges, considering their 
complexity beyond its borders.

Citizen participation
In addition to enriching the content of the proposals, citizen participation as a tool for joint creation enables to better 
understand the needs and grants greater legitimacy to the initiatives. Engagement occurs when a government includes 
and favors citizen protagonism, using different mechanisms that can influence the definition of challenges, the search 
for solutions and decision-making. Including civic engagement as a cross-cutting approach aims to provide a response 
closer  to  the  needs  of  residents  that  guarantees  the  City’s  identity  and  increases  the  sense  of  belonging,  citizen 
commitment and involvement with the government.

Data and Technology
It is a vision that aims to generate concrete solutions, taking advantage of collective intelligence and developing solid 
links among government, residents, businesses, civil society and academia.

Advances  in  information  and  communication  technologies  (ICTs)  pose  challenges,  but  also  great  opportunities  for 
open  governments.  The  generation,  publication  and  use  of  data  imply  robust  and  better-quality  public  policies, 
the development of evidence-based projects and proposals that have residents at the center of their drafting and 
development. The availability of data to think about the future of our cities also involves analyzing and understanding 
the information to develop efficient responses at critical moments. It also requires the government to be involved in 
the smart use of technologies and resources, to optimize their processes and to make this information accessible and 
useful for citizens, by transforming them into a tool to improve the quality of life in the city.

35

Resilient

Buenos Aires

PILLAR 1:
Diversity, gender and coexistence

PILLAR 2:
Innovation, talent and opportunities 

PILLAR 3:
Environment and sustainability
PILLAR 4:
Social and urban integration

PILLAR 5:
Security and risk management

1.1 
 

1.2 
 

2.1 
 

2.2 
 

2.3 
 

Transform Buenos Aires into a city that promotes 
women’s full development

Recognize and promote diversity as an identity 
value of the City

Guarantee inclusive quality education providing 
students the skills required by the jobs of the future

Promote learning opportunities that favor access 
to quality jobs 

Foster innovation and generation of opportunities 
for economic development of the City

3.1 

Develop an integrated green infrastructure system

3.2 

Promote the City’s energy sustainability 

3.3 
 

4.1 
 

4.2 
 

Implement a comprehensive waste 
management policy

Improve access to quality housing for all 
City residents

Promote sustainable mobility and a 
metropolitan cross-modal system

4.3 
 

Design a people-oriented city which 
promotes coexistence and enjoyment

5.1 
 

5.2 
 

5.3 
 

Foster citizens who are informed, prepared and 
aware of the challenges they face

Prepare the City to face the impacts of 
climate change

Drive innovation and technology to build 
safer spaces

1.1.1   Commitment to gender equity in the labor market
1.1.2  Gender Indicators System
1.1.3  Accessible and safe mobility for all women
1.1.4  Action against gender-based violence
1.1.5  Strengthening sexual and reproductive health
1.2.1   Orgullo BA (BA Pride)
1.2.2  BA Migrante (Migrants in BA)
1.2.3  Coexistence in BA 
1.2.4  BA Visión Cero (BA Zero Vision)
1.2.5  Cultural pass
1.2.6  Creative neighborhoods
2.1.1  Secondary school of the future
2.1.2  Comprehensive Digital Education Plan 
2.1.3  Schools of the future
2.1.4  Teachers of the future
2.1.5  Predictive analysis
2.2.1  Segunda Vuelta Activa (Active Job Reinsertion)
2.2.2 Jobs of tomorrow
2.2.3 BA Emprende (BA Entrepreneur Academy)
2.3.1  Urban Innovation Fund
2.3.2 Innovation park
2.3.3 Public data policy
2.3.4 Social and sustainable procurement
2.3.5 Industries of the future
2.3.6 New collaborative economies
2.3.7 Study BA
3.1.1   Green walls and roofs in schools
3.1.2  Urban tree planting plan and metropolitan bio-corridors
3.1.3  Privately owned publicly-accessible spaces
3.1.4  New green areas
3.2.1   Sustainable homes and buildings
3.2.2  Sustainability challenge for businesses
3.2.3  Efficient public buildings
3.3.1   BA 4 Rs (reduce, reuse, recycle and recover)
3.3.2  Waste to energy
3.3.3  Technology and innovation in waste management
4.1.1    Social and urban integration of low-income neighborhoods
4.1.2   Access to affordable housing
4.2.1   Integrated public transport
4.2.2  Electric mobility
4.2.3  BA Carpool
4.2.4  BA en bici (BA by bike)
4.3.1   Development of pedestrian priority zones and vehicle restriction in 
          the downtown area 
4.3.2  Last mile logistics 
4.3.3  Barrio 31 High Line Park
4.3.4  Commune 8 on a human scale
4.3.5  Reform of the urban planning and building codes
4.3.6  Art in neighborhoods
4.3.7  Reconversion of equipment and urban regeneration
4.3.8  BA sin barreras (BA without Barriers)
4.3.9  BA vuelve al río (BA Returns to the River)
5.1.1    Know BA
5.1.2   Schools Get Ready
5.1.3   Network of residents in the face of climate change
5.2.1   Hydraulic Plan
5.2.2  Early warning systems for storms and heat waves
5.2.3  Risk Contingency and Preparedness Fund
5.2.4  Single Coordination and Control Center
5.3.1   Transformation of public spaces through tactical urbanism
5.3.2  Comprehensive public security system

37

PILLAR 1

Diversity, gender
and coexistence

A prepared city, aware of its challenges
and willing to adapt

1.1 TRANSFORM BUENOS AIRES INTO A CITY THAT PROMOTES WOMEN’S 
FULL DEVELOPMENT

GOOD HEALTH 
AND WELL-BEING

GENDER
EQUALITY

DECENT WORK
AND ECONOMIC
GROWTH

SUSTAINABLE
CITIES AND
COMMUNITIES

1.2 RECOGNIZE AND PROMOTE DIVERSITY AS AN IDENTITY VALUE OF THE CITY

GENDER
EQUALITY

REDUCED
INEQUALITIES

SUSTAINABLE
CITIES AND
COMMUNITIES

PEACE, JUSTICE
AND STRONG
INSTITUTIONS

39

“Buenos Aires seeks to promote the development of 
all its inhabitants, attending to their differences and 
enhancing coexistence in diversity.”

Current Situation

Building  a  society  with  equal  opportunities  entails  promoting  equal  treatment,  non-discrimination  and  effective  social 
inclusion, no matter the gender, sexual orientation, ethnic, migratory origin or the religious beliefs of those who are part of 
it. By the same token, Buenos Aires seeks to promote the development of all its inhabitants, attending to their differences 
and fostering coexistence in diversity.

More than half the population of the City is female (54%). Although women have a greater presence than men in compulsory 
schooling, only 50% of working-age women (over 14) work (SIGBA, 2018). Upon entering the labor market, women have fewer 
senior  positions  and  leadership  roles  than  men.  Women  are  employed  mainly  in  domestic  tasks,  education,  health  and 
commerce (CIPPEC, 2018) and, in turn, dedicate two more hours a day to care-giving tasks.  

Within this framework, Buenos Aires began to generate and make available statistical information with a gender perspective, 
through  a  Gender  Indicators  System  that  disaggregates  the  information  by  sex  to  measure  how  we  are  doing,  and  to 
implement interventions that will reduce the gender gap. Driven by this system, Buenos Aires announced changes in the 
legislation to implement a new family leave scheme for civil servants in the City.

On the other hand, the City pioneered rights extension in Latin America by allowing civil unions between same-sex people 
in  2002,  before  the  national  reform  that  led  to  same  sex  marriage  in  2010.  In  turn,  the  City  opened  the  country’s  first 
Transgender  House:  a  safe  environment  where  transgender  people  can  empower  themselves  and  gain  knowledge  and 
skills without fear of feeling discriminated against, rejected or attacked. The City also promotes trainings aimed to raise 
awareness about sexual diversity and LGBTI (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex) issues in institutional settings, 
such as schools, educational environments and health centers.  

Buenos Aires is a thriving city, host to ongoing internal and external migration: 37.3% of the residents of the city were not 
native-born, while 13.5 % are foreign-born (DGEyC, 2011). The quality of health and education, a rich cultural offer, a high 
employment demand and the history of our country drive this migratory flow. Providing immigrants with information about 
their rights, advising them on the completion of procedures and reducing discrimination means recognizing and appreciating 
the cultural diversity that communities bring in to the City. To that end, BA Celebra (BA Celebrates) highlights the diverse 
community cultures and offers a scenario shared by all residents, where each community can celebrate their own history 
and identity.

Building a more resilient city entails creating instances that promote the social protection of all communities, supporting 
their engagement and empowerment, in order to create equal opportunities for all the residents that live and move around 
our City.

41

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1.1:  
Transform Buenos Aires into a city that promotes women’s full development 

1.1.1

COMMITMENT TO GENDER EQUITY IN THE LABOR MARKET  

companies,  reforms  of  regulations  within  the 
state itself (for example, the new paternity leave 
scheme)  more  women  are  encouraged  to  join 
the labor market in quality jobs and with equal 
pay  as  men.  The  initiative  seeks  to  agree  with 
employers  and  unions  measures  that  achieve 
these  objectives  by  means  of  evidence-based 
dialogue  considering  both,  the  wage  gap  and 
the working conditions. The City also offers free 
legal  guidance  for  situations  of  labor  conflict, 
training in programming, technical and financial 
assistance for entrepreneurs. All these services 
will particularly foster women participation.

Actions
- Implement a family leave scheme to promote 
shared  responsibility  in  care-giving  tasks  for 
employees  of  the  Government  of  the  City  of 
Buenos Aires.
- Boost a partnership with the private sector to 
promote equity in the labor market.
- Set up a tripartite commission (unions, GCBA, 
and business chambers) for equality in the labor 
market.
- Implement blind hiring as a recruitment tool in 
the government.
- Develop an alliance with Great Place to Work 
to add gender indicators to their organizational 
climate surveys.
- Assess the work environment of the Government 
of the City with a gender perspective.

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
- Directorate General of Women (Ministry of 
Human Development and Habitat - MDHyH)
- General Secretariat and International Relations
- Private sector
- Undersecretariat of Employment (Ministry of 
Government -MGOB)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Innovation, talent and opportunities

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Gender inequity

Economic inequity

INDICATORS
- Number of companies that adopt the blind 
hiring model
- Number of government areas using gender 
perspective to assess work environment 
- Number of companies classified as best 
workplaces for women
- Percentage of non-pregnant employees 
entitled to family leave
- Number of agreements signed with the 
private sector for equity in the labor market
- Percentage of GCBA female officials in 
hierarchical positions
- Female labor force participation 
- Wage gap 

Pillar 1: Diversity, gender and coexistence

Achieving  gender  equity  is  essential  to  have 
resilient  societies.  To  that  end,  it  is  necessary 
to  work  articulately  on  the  three  dimensions 
of  women’s  autonomy:  physical,  economic  and 
decision  making  (ECLAC,  2018).  The  ability  to 
generate  their  own  income  will  make  women 
less vulnerable to situations of violence, whereas 
sharing the unpaid work will give them greater 
chances to participate in the public space.

Gender equality is advancing slowly worldwide. 
And  while  progress  has  been  made  regarding 
female  access 
to  educational  credentials, 
this  does  not  translate  into  greater  economic 
autonomy. There is a difference of 27 percentage 
points  in  women  labor  force  participation,  and 
the  wage  gap  is  of  23%  (Women  20,  2018;  UN 
Women, 2018).

In the City, the economic activity rate by gender 
continues to be low. In 2017, the male activity rate 
was of 70.6%, while the female rate accounted 
for  57.1%.  Additionally,  women  from  the  city  of 
Buenos  Aires  dedicate  on  average  of  1.5  more 
hour a day than men to care-giving tasks, which 
takes the wage gap to 21.8% (SIGBA, 2018).

Upon  entering  the  labor  market,  women  are 
employed in sectors that reflect the tasks that 
traditionally fall on them in the domestic sphere: 
education, health and commerce (CIPPEC, 2018).

On  the  other  hand,  motherhood  is  also  a 
challenge for women when it comes to staying 
in the labor market. In households with children, 
women  are  up  to  20  times  more  likely  to  go 
to  inactivity  than  men.  Furthermore,  evidence 
shows that discrimination against women exists 
and  causes  negative  effects  in  their  hiring, 
remuneration and promotion of their professional 
career, among others.

In  order  to  reverse  the  described  trends,  the 
City  embraced  the  commitment  to  equity  in 
the  labor  market.  Through  a  series  of  actions 
that  include  agreements  with  trade  unions, 

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  1.1:  
Transform Buenos Aires into a city that promotes women’s full development

Changes in the family 
leave scheme consider 
for non-pregnant 
individuals

15 calendar days 
per birth

30 days of paid leave during the 
first year of life

120 days of unpaid leave during 
the first year of life

Pregnant women can choose to transfer 
their last 30 days of leave

43

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  1.1:  
Transform Buenos Aires into a city that promotes women’s full development

1.1.2

GENDER INDICATORS SYSTEM 

the  gender  situation,  informing  the  public  and 
encouraging  evidence-based  decision  making 
towards increased equal opportunities. This is an 
essential  tool  for  the  development  of  the  city’s 
resilience strategy, since it enables to design new 
policies and programs, and monitor the progress 
of those already in place.

Actions
-  Develop  conferences  on  “Indicators  System: 
sources and variables”
-  Promote  and  encourage  Plans  for  Equal 
Opportunities within all areas of government

The city of Buenos Aires promotes gender equity 
so  that  men  and  women  can  live,  enjoy  and 
develop their potential with equal opportunities. A 
first step to achieve this ambitious goal is to close 
the  statistical  gap:  having  relevant  information 
differentiated by sex is fundamental to measure 
how we are and to think about what needs to be 
done to achieve equal opportunities for men and 
women. 

To  that  end,  the  City  of  Buenos  Aires’  Gender 
Indicators  System  was  developed:  a  set  of 
statistical  data  and  records  that  create  a 
systemic  vision  of  the  gender  dimension  in  the 
City. It comprises a series of economic, political 
and  socio-demographic  indicators  that  enable 
identifying the progress and challenges women’s 
situation.

The system gathers information in one single site 
with the triple purpose of raising awareness on 

Gender Indicators System
The  information  is  structured  according  to  the  theoretical  framework  proposed  by  the 
Economic  Commission  for  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean  of  the  UN  (ECLAC)  in  three 
interrelated dimensions: 
•Autonomy in decision making: refers to the possibility of influencing decision-making processes.
•Economic autonomy: addresses the difference between men and women in their capacity 
of generating income and resources from access to paid work and educational credentials.
•Physical  autonomy:  refers  to  the  capacity  of  individuals  to  act  according  to  their  own 
choice and not according to the decision of others. This dimension is understood as the 
capacity of preserving their integrity, deciding and having control over their own body, their 
sexuality and fertility.

TIMEFRAME

Short-term

STATUS
In progress

STAkEHOLDERS
- General Directorate of Statistics and 
Censuses (Ministry of Economy and  
Finance - MEyF)
- General Directorate of Women (Ministry of 
Human Development and Habitat - MDHyH)
- General Secretariat and International 
Relations

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Innovation, talent and opportunities

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Gender inequity

INDICATORS
- Number of indicators included in the 
Gender Indicators System of the City of 
Buenos Aires (SIGBA)
- Number of people who visit the website
- Number of information downloads     

Pillar 1: Diversity, gender and coexistence

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  1.1:  
Transform Buenos Aires into a city that promotes women’s full development

ACCESIBLE AND SAFE MOBILITY FOR ALL WOMEN

to  accompanying  other 

In cities, women show a different travel pattern 
than men. While the latter carry out unidirectional 
and longer trips, women cover shorter distances 
and  tend  to  make  more  trips  related  to  house 
chores  or 
family 
members (IDB, 2017). At the same time, women 
are more susceptible to suffering from situations 
of insecurity and violence, which often reduces 
or  deteriorates  their  daily  trips.  This  frequently 
limits labor, educational, recreational and social 
possibilities for women.

For this reason, the City has the challenge of 
including the gender perspective in its mobility 
policies and in the design of public spaces to 
reduce  vulnerability  as  women  move  around 
the city.

The BA Mapea initiative (BA Mapping) proposes 
to carry out sessions of collaborative mapping in 

different points of the city on accessibility and 
daily mobility, highlighting the vulnerability and 
the  use  of  public  spaces  and  public  transport. 
The  initiative  seeks  to  gather  information  that 
accounts for the status of the different places in 
terms of infrastructure, security, and accessibility 
to  improve  the  planning  and  managing  of 
territorial resources. 

Actions
- Establish a date for BA Mapea.
- Generate evidence to promote intervention in 
public spaces.
-  Incorporate  the  gender  perspective  to  the 
design and planning of public spaces and to the 
metropolitan transport network.

BA Mapea en Barrio 20 (BA Mapping in Neighborhood 20)
In May 2018 the City worked with women from Barrio 20 to conduct a participatory mapping 
focused on gender and mobility. The purpose of the activity was to understand how women 
move, through collecting and generating data. This proposal aims to generate information 
to think about policies that improve women’s daily mobility in Barrio 20 and enhance their 
physical and economic autonomy.  

1.1.3

TIMEFRAME

Short-term

STATUS
Pilot project

STAkEHOLDERS
- City Housing Institute (Office of the Chief of 
Staff- JGM)
- General Secretariat and International Relations
- Undersecretariat of Maintenance and Public  
Space (Ministry of Environment and Public 
Space - MAyEP)
- Undersecretariat of Citizen Security (Ministry 
of Justice and Security- MJyS)
- Secretariat of Transport (Ministry of Urban 
Development and Transport - MDUyT)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Social and urban integration

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Gender inequity

Urban deterioration

Inadequate public transport systems

Insecurity

INDICATORS
- Number of participatory mappings carried 
out with gender perspective
- Number of women involved in participatory 
mappings with gender perspective     

45

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  1.1:  
Transform Buenos Aires into a city that promotes women’s full development

1.1.4

ACTION AGAINST GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE

Cases of gender-based violence in the City led 
to  develop  institutional  tools  in  the  agencies 
that deal with victim care. Therefore, promoting 
gender  equality 
requires  working  against 
violence  based  on  the  problematization  and 
dissemination of the rights of women and LGBTI 
groups.  

In this context, the City developed a prevention 
protocol 
in  schools,  with  the  purpose  of 
preventing  and  eradicating  violence  and 
discrimination based on sexual orientation and 
gender identity. This protocol provides tools and 
training for educators of secondary and tertiary 
schools  to  act  in  response  to  complaints  from 
students and thus, be prepared to solve these 
situations.

On  the  other  hand,  insecurity  is  one  of  the 
main  concerns  of  residents  and  an  essential 
component for the coexistence and enjoyment 
of public spaces. The City has a brigade against 
gender-based violence, comprised of 300 female 
trained officers in how violence cycles unfold, in 
detection  indicators  of  violent  situations,  and 
in  assistance  resources  to  attend  and  protect 
women involved in violent relationships. 

Additionally,  15  community  police  stations  will 
be  created  to  encourage  proximity  between 

residents  and  law  enforcement  agencies.  They 
will have a dedicated unit to receive complaints 
and offer advice.

Actions
-  Install  a  Comprehensive  Care  Center  for 
Women in each Commune.
-  Provide  specialized  telephone  assistance  to 
victims  of  gender-based  violence  through  the 
144  line,  anonymously,  nationally  and  free  of 
charge.
- Deliver panic buttons for emergencies.
- Raise awareness among government agents.
- Use an institutional action protocol to prevent 
and  intervene  in  situations  of  gender-based 
violence  and  discrimination  based  on  sexual 
orientation  and  gender  identity  for  secondary 
and tertiary schools.
-  Install  homes  and  shelters  for  gender-based 
violence victims.
- Conduct a mass media and awareness-building 
campaign. 
-  Develop 
Program for violent dating relationships

the  Prevention  and  Assistance 

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
In progress

STAkEHOLDERS
- Directorate General of Women (Ministry of 
Human Development and Habitat - MDHyH)
- Undersecretariat of Human Rights and 
Cultural Pluralism (Office of the Deputy 
Chief of Government - VJG)
- Undersecretariat of Citizen Security 
(Ministry of Justice and Security -JyS)
- Ministry of Education and Innovation

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Security and risk management

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Lack of social cohesion 

Gender inequity 

Economic inequity

INDICATORS
- Number of trained teachers
- Number of police officers added to the 
brigade against gender-based violence 
- Percentage of progress of the 
Comprehensive Care Centers for Women 
(CIM in Spanish) 
- Number of communal commissariats with 
specialized units in gender violence    

Pillar 1: Diversity, gender and coexistence

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  1.1:  
Transform Buenos Aires into a city that promotes women’s full development

STRENGTHENING SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH 

The concept of sexual and reproductive health is 
defined as “a complete state of physical, mental, 
social well-being and not the merely absence of 
disease or infirmity, in all matters related to the 
reproductive system” (ICPD, 1994). 

To  that  effect,  Law  N°  418  on  Reproductive 
Health  and  Responsible  Procreation  of  the 
city  of  Buenos  Aires  focuses  on  adolescents 
as  target  of  public  policies  and  assures  the 
existence of services and trained professionals 
in  sexuality  and  procreation.  Therefore,  access 
to  accurate  and  reliable  information  on  sexual 
and reproductive health is essential for the full 
development  of  an  autonomous  sexuality  (the 
2016  Youth  Survey  states  that  7.3%  of  young 
people between 15 and 29 years of age are not 
informed on sexual and reproductive health).

On the other hand, Law N° 2110 on Comprehensive 
Sex Education is taught at all mandatory levels 
and modalities of the educational system, either 
public  or  private  and  at  all  teacher  training 
colleges  that  depend  on  the  Government 
of  the  City  of  Buenos  Aires.  In  this  way,  the 
City  guarantees  the  right  to  information  for 
the  exercise  of  a  responsible  comprehensive 
sexuality and with education in values.

Thus, 
the  Resilience  Strategy  emphasizes 
the  development  of  a  Comprehensive  and 
Cross-Ministerial  Plan 
improve  sexual 
and  reproductive  health,  with  the  purpose 

to 

of  enriching  information  and  access  to  the 
necessary resources in order to strengthen care, 
prevent unintentional pregnancies and sexually 
transmitted infections. In addition, it also seeks 
to  boost  the  Comprehensive  Sex  Education 
(CSE)  with  international  agencies  and  experts, 
so  that  all  students  can  make  informed-based 
and responsible decisions regarding body care, 
inter-personal relationships, and sexuality. 

Actions
-  Increase  care  and  counseling  providing  in 
public schools, Health and Community Centers 
(CECACs  for  its  acronym  in  Spanish)  and  City 
Communes.
- Strengthen the technical teams of the Ministries 
of Education and Health.
-  Carry  out  a  mass  media  campaign  on  little-
known  contraceptive  methods  and  demand 
from health sub-sectors to provide them free of 
charge.
- Open CECACs on Saturdays.
-  Place  condom  dispensers  in  City’s  Healthy 
Stations and cultural spaces.
-  Distribute  implant  contraceptive  methods  to 
women aged 12 to 24 with public health coverage.

1.1.5

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
- Ministry of Education and Innovation
- Ministry of Health

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Social and urban integration

Innovation, talent and opportunities

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Marginalization of young people

Inadequate health systems

Gender inequity

INDICATORS
- Number of condoms delivered
- Number of mass media campaigns 
generated
- Number of women who accessed implant 
contraceptive methods 
- Number of Health and Community Centers 
(CECACs) open on Saturdays

47

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  1.2:  
Recognize and promote diversity as an identity value of the City

1.2.1

ORGULLO BA (BA PRIDE)

Discrimination  based  on  sexual  orientation 
or  gender  identity  represents  one  of  the  most 
widespread  causes  of  violence  and  exclusion 
worldwide. Visibility is a fundamental tool to raise 
awareness about the LGBTI issues. Every year the 
City promotes different cultural, business, hotel, 
recreational  and  sportive  activities,  that  create 
spaces for exchange and empowerment. Some 
of  these  are  Semana  Diversa  (Diversity  Week), 
Alta en el cielo (High in the sky) and Jornadas 
Porteñas  de  Diversidad  Sexual  (Buenos  Aires 
Conference  on  Sexual  Diversity).  The  City  also 
celebrates  the  Pride  Parade  every  year,  where 
thousands  of  people  demonstrate  to  express 
their freedom and rights vindication.

Buenos Aires also developed a training program 
on  LGBTI  issues,  with  workshops  and  courses 
to  raise  awareness  on  gender  diversity,  sexual 
identity and the defense of the LGBTI community 
rights. Special emphasis is placed on sensitizing 
law enforcement agencies and the civil service. 

Furthermore,  the  Comprehensive  Transgender 
Plan is developed with public policies aimed at 
assuring  transgender  persons  the  full  exercise 
of 
freedoms,  promoting 
respect  and  social  integration.  The  Job  Bank 

rights  and 

their 

for transgender people and the creation of the 
Transgender House are part of this framework.

Building a more resilient city entails generating 
instances of protection for the most vulnerable 
sectors,  along  with  a  sustained  promotion  of 
human  rights  and  the  creation  of  integration, 
participation and empowerment policies. 

Actions
-  Foster  the  Comprehensive  Transgender  Plan: 
promote social inclusion by means of counselling 
work on health, education and employment.
- Promote the Semana Diversa (Diversity Week) 
event  to  celebrate  the  LGBTI  community  with 
cultural,  human  rights,  sportive  and  business 
activities.
-  Develop  the  Jornada  Porteña  de  Diversidad 
Sexual  (Buenos  Aires  Conference  on  Sexual 
Diversity) event, to debate, reflect and exchange 
topics regarding Sexual Diversity.
-  Support  the  yearly  celebration  of  the  Pride 
Parade.

TIMEFRAME

Long-term

STATUS
In progress

STAkEHOLDERS
- Undersecretariat of Human Rights and 
Cultural Pluralism (Office of the Deputy 
Chief of Government - VJG)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Social and urban integration

Innovation, talent and opportunities

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Social discrimination

Gender inequity

INDICATORS
- Number of government areas made aware 
of LGBTI issues
- Number of people attending mass 
events on diversity awareness and non-
discrimination
- Number of people assisted at the 
Transgender House
- Number of visits to the Transgender House
- Number of people included in the 
comprehensive work access plan for 
transgender persons

Pillar 1: Diversity, gender and coexistence

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  1.2:  
Recognize and promote diversity as an identity value of the City

First Transgender House in Latin America (action in progress)
In 2017 the first Transgender House of Latin America was opened in Buenos Aires. This community center was created with the purpose of 
promoting social protection of the transgender community in Buenos Aires - a space for visibility and support that designs programs, in 
order to improve the living conditions of transgender people, access to health, education and work. It also helps to reduce the levels of daily 
social exclusion, violence and discrimination.

49

Buenos  Aires  as  a  cosmopolitan,  intercultural 
and inclusive city, model of coexistence.

 
Actions
- Set up welcome points where communities of 
migrants live (Welcome Centers).
-  Set  up  Migrant  Guidance  and  Information 
Centers.
-  Expand  activities  for  women  and  youth 
immigrants.
- Promote women’s participation in the Network 
of Community Women.
-  Develop  a  welcome  campaign  where  a  city 
resident acts as immigrant guide to assist and 
help with regards to services and opportunities 
offered by the City.
-  Create  a  guidebook  for  migrants’  rights  to 
facilitate the arrival in the City and the access 
to services.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  1.2: 
Recognize and promote diversity as an identity value of the City 

1.2.2

BA MIGRANTE (MIGRANTS IN BA)

TIMEFRAME

Long-term

STATUS
In progress with new resilient actions

STAkEHOLDERS
- Undersecretariat of Human Rights and 
Cultural Pluralism (Office of the Deputy 
Chief of Government - VJG)
- Ministry of Human Development and Habitat
- Secretariat of Citizen Culture and Civil 
Service (Office of the Chief of Staff - JGM)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Social and urban integration

Innovation, talent and opportunities

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Lack of social cohesion 

Ethnic inequity 

Economic inequity

INDICATORS
- Number of immigrants who visited the 
Migrant Guidance and Information Center  
- Number of immigrants who participate from 
the projects led by the Women’s Network of 
Communities
- Number of immigrants who attended 
information and counseling workshops

Pillar 1: Diversity, gender and coexistence

(2.1%). 

According to ECLAC-IOM, 4.8% of the Argentine 
population is immigrant, which makes Argentina 
the  South  American  country  with  the  largest 
foreign population, even duplicating the regional 
average 
In  Buenos  Aires,  migrants 
account for 12.8% of the inhabitants, and 4 out 
of  10  people  living  in  the  City  were  not  born 
there.  In  this  way,  the  quality  of  education 
and  health,  a  richer  cultural  offer,  a  higher 
employment demand and the migratory history 
of  our  country,  make  Buenos  Aires  a  tempting 
destination. At the same time, its identity reflects 
foreign 
influences,  creating  a 
heterogeneous and attractive result.  

intertwining 

Immigrants play an active role in the vitality of 
the  city.  For  this  reason,  BA  Migrante  (Migrant 
BA) seeks to develop an action plan to promote 
the  inclusion  of  migrants  in  the  City  through 
partnerships,  collaboration  and  a  shared 
understanding with civil society organizations.

Under  the  challenge  of  bringing  solutions  for 
the  neighbors,  the  City  is  designing  a  Migrant 
Guidance  and  Information  Center,  a  mobile 
unit  that  is  set  up  in  events  with  the  highest 
concentration  of  migrants,  organized  by  the 
GCBA. The purpose of this center is to provide 
migrants  with  information  about  their  rights, 
assist  in  the  completion  of  procedures  and 
sensitize the population to reduce discrimination.

On  the  other  hand,  we  will  set  up  information 
points close to the iconic spaces of the migrant 
communities  living  in  the  City  (social  clubs, 
associations, etc.), and organize information and 
counseling  workshops  for  groups  with  specific 
demands.  This  way,  all  the  migrant  population 
will be reached, and accessible resources, such 
as  transport,  communication,  education  and 
services will be provided. 

With the purpose of encouraging the recognition 
and  appreciation  that  the  cultural  diversity  of 
migrants  and  their  communities  bring  to  the 
identity of Buenos Aires, this initiative positions 

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  1.2: 
Recognize and promote diversity as an identity value of the City

REFERENCE

Welcome  Pittsburgh:  Aims  to  improve  the  lives  of  immigrants  and  residents  by  creating  informed,  diverse  and  welcoming  experiences 
throughout the city. The plan includes a wide set of recommendations structured in three categories: Welcome neighbor! (creates community 
connections),  Bridge  to  the  City  (articulates  government  services,  policies  and  housing)  and  Prospering  Together  (promotes  economic 
opportunities).

51

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  1.2: 
Recognize and promote diversity as an identity value of the City 

1.2.3

COEXISTENCE IN BA

A resilient city is inclusive and free from all forms 
of  discrimination.  The  city  of  Buenos  Aires  is 
characterized  by  multiple  cultures  that  cohabit 
and coexist in it. Hundreds of communities make 
up the identity of the city, and diverse cultures 
and religions enrich the socio-cultural fabric.  

To build resilience, it is important to work hard 
to  promote  good  relations  among  residents, 
religious  and  migrant  communities,  in  search 
of  a  more  plural  and  inclusive  city.  Buenos 
Aires  implements  public  policies  to  render  the 
multiple coexisting cultures more visible and to 
foster  respect  and  non-discrimination.  It  also 
promotes interreligious dialogue and organizes 
different  advocacy  campaigns,  having  Buenos 
Aires  as  scenario  of  celebrations  that  promote 
and preserve traditions, respect and integration 
of all worldviews and values.

sentencing. This program consists of workshops 
aimed  at  reducing  conflicts  and  promoting 
coexistence among residents. 

Actions
-  Raise  awareness,  train  and  promote  human 
rights  to  tackle  discrimination  and  sensitize 
residents of the City.
-  Make  the  identity  and  roots  of  each  migrant 
community in the City visible, showcasing their 
culture in public spaces.
-  Promote  an  interreligious  meeting  to  break 
down  prejudices  and  enhance  the  richness  of 
each tradition.
-  Apply  the  principles  of  restorative  justice  to 
reduce  the  levels  of  conflict  and  disseminate 
coexistence.

in  public 

In  addition,  it  stimulates  reflection  on  daily 
practices 
establishments,  by 
encouraging  an  inclusive  State  that  respects 
multiculturalism. Through the Probation program, 
the  City  promotes  mechanisms  of  restorative 
justice 
those  performing  community 
service in lieu of full trial followed by custodial 

for 

TIMEFRAME

Long-term

STATUS
In progress

STAkEHOLDERS
- Migrant communities
- Religious communities
- General Secretariat and International 
Relations
- Undersecretariat of Human Rights and 
Cultural Pluralism (Office of the Deputy 
Chief of Government - VJG)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Social and urban integration

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Social discrimination 

Lack of social cohesion

INDICATORS
- Number of mass events of religious and 
migrant communities
- Number of attendants to mass events
- Number of migrant associations supported 

Pillar 1: Diversity, gender and coexistence

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  1.2: 
Recognize and promote diversity as an identity value of the City

BA VISIóN CERO (BA ZERO VISION)

Improving  road  safety  requires  a  collective 
effort from the whole society. The adoption and 
promotion of safe behaviors is a responsibility of 
the City and of all of us who move around it. It 
involves generating a cultural change in traffic, 
so that we can incorporate a safer, more solidary 
and  friendlier  attitude  to  improve  the  way  we 
relate  in  our  streets  and  redesign  the  public 
space to give priority to people. 

Therefore,  the  City  adopts  Visión  Cero  (Zero 
Vision), a program whose ethical principle states 
that no one should die or suffer life-long injuries 
in car accidents. This adds to the concept that 
the  transport  system  should  be  designed  to 
contain and reduce the impact of human errors, 
creating  what  is  internationally  known  as  Safe 
System. 

Building a resilient city entails the commitment 
to  reduce  fatalities  caused  by  road  accidents, 
by working jointly and in coordination between 
the  public,  the  private  sector  and  the  civil 
society. The Road Safety Plan establishes work 
structured around 4 areas monitored by the City 
Road  Safety  Observatory:  safe  infrastructure; 

legislation and control; education and awareness, 
and citizens commitment. 

Actions
- Create safe environments for pedestrians and 
expand restriction zones for motor vehicles.
- Implement maximum speed zones of 30 km/h.
- Carry out pedestrian interventions that generate 
shorter and safer crossings for pedestrians.
-  Conduct  mass  media  campaigns  focused  on 
pedestrian priority.
- Train and raise awareness among professional 
drivers, motorcyclists and cyclists.
- Reduce the maximum speeds of large avenues 
in the city.

Sube y Baja (Pick up and Drop off) (program in progress)
In the framework of the Road Safety Plan, the City created the Sube y Baja (Pick up and Drop off) 
program, a project that engages teachers, school principals, parents and students. The program 
proposes a methodology to organize children’s entrance and exit from schools and to improve 
traffic  in  neighborhoods.  The  proposal  adapts  to  the  characteristics  and  surroundings  of  the 
establishment and prioritizes public transport, pedestrian mobility and cycling.

1.2.4

TIMEFRAME

Short-term

STATUS
In progress with new resilient actions

STAkEHOLDERS
- Undersecretariat of Sustainable and Safe 
Mobility (Ministry of Urban Development and 
Transport -MDUyT) 

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Security and risk managements

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Road safety

Lack of social cohesion

INDICATORS
- Number of road accidents
- Number of fatalities in road accidents

53

that include the public, private and independent 
cultural offer.

Offering  and  consuming  culture  in  the  City 
enables  to  bridge  the  gap  among  different 
neighborhoods, 
closer 
and  promoting  a  space  for  encounters  and 
coexistence  among  different  residents  of  the 
City. 

bringing 

realities 

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  1.2: 
Recognize and promote diversity as an identity value of the City 

1.2.5

CULTURAL PASS

Facilitating  and  expanding  access  to  culture 
is  a  key  aspect  to  boost  a  strategic  industry 
for  the  City.  For  this  reason,  the  Cultural  Pass 
initiative  provides  access  to  cultural  goods  for 
public-schools students between 16 to 18 years 
old by means of a card. This initiative will help 
foster  the  cultural  consumption  and  generate 
youth  greater  demand  for  cultural  industries. 
Additionally, it can be used on a preset cluster 

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
In progress

STAkEHOLDERS
- Ministry of Education and Innovation
- Ministry of Culture

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Social and urban integration

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Social breakdown

Urban decay

Lack of social cohesion

INDICATORS
- Number of young people who have used 
the cultural pass

Pillar 1: Diversity, gender and coexistence

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  1.2: 
Recognize and promote diversity as an identity value of the City

CREATIVE NEIGHBORHOODS

Access  to  culture  is  an  essential  element  to 
overcome  the  social  barriers  that  exist  among 
neighborhoods.  Promoting  access  of  residents 
to  public  and  private  cultural  offers  is  a  key 
factor  to  build  true  social  cohesion.  Bringing 
culture  closer  to  neighbors  and  strengthening 
the  local  identity  boosts  a  network  fabric 
that  decentralizes  the  cultural  offer  in  Buenos 
Aires.  For  this  reason,  the  Barrios  Creativos 
(Creative  Neighborhoods)  program  will  launch 
a competition for dwellers’ teams to design the 
cultural  agenda  of  their  neighborhoods  and 
will  grant  financing  to  turn  the  best  ideas  into 
projects.

to  enhance 

the 
The  competition  aims 
relationship  among  local  cultural  stakeholders, 
draft a collaborative cultural plan to highlight the 
identity  of  each  neighborhood,  add  value  and 
showcase proposals to generate new alternative 
cultural circuits of quality. 

The  purpose  is  to  reward  those  collaborative 

and participatory projects where the relationship 
between public and private offers is promoted. 
The first prize will get the funding and support 
of  the  project  for  one  year.  There  will  also  be 
3  special  mentions  that  will  receive  resources 
and  support  for  the  project,  and  11  supported 
activities of non-winning proposals.

These actions allow the City to expand the offer 
of  neighborhood  cultural  centers  included  in 
the official agenda and increase the number of 
cultural  activities  and  events  jointly  organized 
by  local  cultural  stakeholders  and  the  Ministry 
of Culture. 

training  sessions,  clinics  and 

Actions
-  Organize 
personalized advice for cultural managers.  
-  Strengthen  the  cultural  public  and  private 
spaces of the City.

1.2.6

TIMEFRAME

Long-term

STATUS
In progress 

STAkEHOLDERS
- Ministry of Culture 

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Social and urban integration

Innovation, talent and opportunities

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

*

30 RENOWNED
MENTORS

(Ana Kats, Galpón de Guevara,
CHELA, El Emergente,
El Quetzal, among others)

MENTORS

GOVERNMENT

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

+ 500

cultural forums in the year

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Lack of social cohesion 

*

Inspire and train the 
stakeholders who 
participate in the program. 
In charge of setting up 
Government proposal

CULTURAL
ECOSYSTEM

+ 600

cultural centers, 
independent theaters, 
popular libraries, 
retirement centers, 
neighborhood clubs 
involved

INDICATORS
- Number of financed projects

REFERENCE
London Borough of Culture: It brings 
together Londoners of all ages and 
backgrounds, putting culture at the heart of 
local communities, with the aim of fostering 
cohesion and the sense of belonging in the 
city.

55

PILLAR 2

Innovation, talent
and opportunities

A City that promotes equality of opportunities for 
all its residents, that anticipates the advances of 
the future developments and provides the conditions 
to develop their potential.

2.1 GUARANTEE INCLUSIVE QUALITY EDUCATION PROVIDING STUDENTS THE SKILLS REQUIRED 
BY THE JOBS OF THE FUTURE.

NO POVERTY

QUALITY 
EDUCATION

DECENT WORK
AND ECONOMIC
GROWTH

2.2 PROMOTE LEARNING OPPORTUNITIES FAVORING ACCESS TO QUALITY JOBS.

QUALITY 
EDUCATION

DECENT WORK
AND ECONOMIC
GROWTH

INDUSTRY, 
INNOVATION AND 
INFRASTRUCTURE

SUSTAINABLE 
CITIES AND 
COMMUNITIES

PARTNERSHIPS 
FOR THE GOALS

2.3 FOSTER INNOVATION AND GENERATION OF ECONOMIC DEVEOPMENT OPPORTUNITIES OF 
THE CITY.

DECENT WORK
AND ECONOMIC
GROWTH

INDUSTRY, 
INNOVATION AND
INFRASTRUCTURE

PEACE, JUSTICE 
AND STRONG 
INSTITUTIONS

PARTNERSHIPS 
FOR THE GOALS

57

“The City is moving forward in changing the education 
model  to  anticipate  these  challenges,  focusing  on 
students being able to learn the necessary skills to 
cope with the world of today and tomorrow.”

Current Situation

The  advance  of  information  and  communication  technologies  is  changing  the  world.  Digital  revolution  has  generated 
immediate benefits such as facilitating communication and information, further flexibility, emergence of new jobs and new 
ways to resolve citizens’ needs.

According to the City of Buenos Aires General Directorate of Statistics and Censuses, 1 out of 5 citizens (21.5%) is young. Even 
though they represent a particularly important age group for the development of the country, in the City, 1 out of every 10 
youth face a process of double exclusion: from the education system and from the labor market (Youth Observatory, 2016). 
Furthermore, by 2020 they will make up more than one third of the world’s labor force (Manpower, 2016) and the irruption of 
technology in this scenario will be increasingly higher.

Those  changes  –current  and  expected  ones-  impact  a  wide  range  of  productive  activities,  generating  challenges  and 
enormous development opportunities for cities. They will, in turn, have a great impact on the elimination and reshaping of 
jobs, as well as the skills (soft and technical ones) required by the labor market (Weller, 2017). At the moment, 39% of the 
companies in the city of Buenos Aires face difficulties in covering the appropriate professional profiles due to the lack of 
technical skills, shortage of candidates and lack of experience (INET-GCBA, 2016).

The City is moving forward in changing the education model to anticipate these challenges, focusing on students being able 
to learn the necessary skills to cope with the world of today and tomorrow. In this context, the Secondary School of the 
Future was designed to adjust the school to a more inclusive model that places students in an active role. It incorporates 
innovative formats and new technologies for teaching and anticipates the possible demands of society, by transforming the 
school culture and rethinking institutional patterns and dynamics. On the other hand, the Comprehensive Digital Education 
Plan  aims  at  training  digital  citizens  through  the  implementation  of  different  devices  that  enhance  both  teaching  and 
learning processes. In addition, Buenos Aires developed programs that promote the creation and management of ventures 
contributing towards entrepreneurship and innovative talent as an engine of the City’s economic development.

In this regard, the Resilience Strategy proposes adjusting learning processes, focused on students and teachers, generating 
modern learning spaces that promote talent and innovation development. On the other hand, the strategy highlights and 
boosts the emergence of new jobs and industries countering labor replacement processes, and promoting, in turn, economic 
growth and the adjustment of the City to the changes in the future of employment. 

59

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.1: 
Guarantee inclusive quality education providing students the skills required by the jobs of the future. 

2.1.1

SECONDARY SCHOOL OF THE FUTURE

concept  of  student  based  on  his/her  inclusion 
in the learning processes and questioning those 
definitions  linked  to  a  traditional  way  of  being 
at  secondary  school  (CFE  Resolution  93/09). 
The  Secondary  School  of  the  Future  outlines, 
therefore,  a  school  that  educates  people  who 
are responsible and prepared to make decisions, 
that promotes autonomous learning, and boosts 
creativity  and  research  development,  critical 
thinking and team work.

Actions
-  Strengthen  the  transition  from  primary  to 
secondary school.
- Work by areas of knowledge and by projects 
between different subjects and areas.
- Plan jointly among teachers of different subject 
areas and work in cooperation in the classroom.
-  Build  skills  for  development  in  the  society  of 
tomorrow.
- Support students individually through tutoring.
-  Assess  continuously  knowledge  learning  and 
development of socio-emotional skills.
-  Eliminate  numerical  marks  as 
the  only 
assessment guideline: conceptual, numeric and 
category marks by skill.
-  Support  to  continue  higher  education  and 
compulsory education practices.

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
In progress

STAkEHOLDERS
- Ministry of Education and Innovation
- Public and private organizations where the 
education practices take place

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Fast changes in the labor market

New ways of organizing teaching

INDICATORS
- Percentage of students improving their 
learning.
- Percentage of students remaining in the 
education system.
- Percentage of promoted students.

Pillar 2: Innovation, talent and opportunities

The demands of the knowledge society call for 
the  adjustment  of  the  current  curricula.  In  this 
context,  the  city  of  Buenos  Aires  developed  in 
2015  the  New  Secondary  School  (NES  for  its 
acronym  in  Spanish)  conceived  to  optimize 
the  purpose  and  the  relevance  of  the  training 
offer  for  teenagers,  enhance  the  performance 
of  learning  institutions  and  their  capacity  for 
the  efficient  management  of  education,  the 
implementation  of  new  curricular  formats  and 
the  update  of  educational  content  considering 
youth  cultures  and  the  pregnancy  of  digital 
culture (GCBA, 2015).

In  order 
to  continue  anticipating  coming 
challenges,  the  City  designed  the  Secondary 
School  of  the  Future:  a  more  inclusive  school 
model, that inspires, stimulates, challenges and, 
especially,  places  students  in  an  active  role. 
Furthermore, it contributes to prepare students 
to face the disruption implied by technological 
changes  affecting  the  capacity  for  adaptation 
and  internalization  of  the  new  technologies, 
which,  in  turn,  trigger  with  more  swiftness  the 
need  of  appropriate  professional  profiles  in 
terms of both, specific knowledge and soft skills 
(INET-GCBA, 2016).

Hence,  the  Secondary  School  of  the  Future 
is  tailored  to  the  new  technologies,  the  new 
formats  of  teaching  and  learning  processes, 
and the new demands of society, transforming 
the  school  culture  and  rethinking  institutional 
spaces, logics and dynamics. Thus, the different 
curricular  areas  are  to  be  integrated  into  four 
areas of knowledge promoting articulated work. 
On the other hand, in the last year of school and 
considering training for higher education or the 
world of work, the initiative includes a period of 
school for pre-university or pre-tertiary training 
and integrating educational practices.

Expanding  the  current  notion  of  schooling, 
considering  the  students’  diverse  social  and 
cultural  background 
implies  redefining  the 

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.1: 
Guarantee inclusive quality education providing students the skills required by the jobs of the future. 

REFERENCE
Nueva York: Developed an alternative secondary school whose main purpose is to offer students learning experiences encompassing the different resources 
and companies in the city. It is, thus, based on classroom work, training practices and preparing the portfolio for graduation.

61

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.1:  
Guarantee inclusive quality education providing students the skills required by the jobs of the future.

2.1.2

COMPREHENSIVE DIGITAL EDUCATION PLAN

Focused on the pedagogical use of technology, the 
city of Buenos Aires developed the Comprehensive 
Digital  Education  Plan  (PIED,  for  its  acronym  in 
Spanish)  for  students  to  acquire  and  develop 
the  necessary  skills  to  develop  themselves  in 
the  world  of  today  and  tomorrow.  Furthermore, 
it  aims  at  training  digital  citizens  through  the 
implementation  of  a  wide  range  of  devices  that 
enrich teaching and learning processes at initial, 
primary and secondary education throughout the 
public schools of the City.

Following  this,  the  PIED  consists  of  six  pillars: 
digital  workshop  (initial  level),  Plan  Sarmiento 
(primary  and  secondary  level),  digital  areas 
such  as  schools’  technology  center  -education, 
programming and robotics, and 3D media- (primary 
and  secondary  level),  Aprendé  programando 
(Learn  by  Programing,  secondary  level),  Codo  a 
Codo (Hand in Hand, a specialization course) and 
Education Platforms. 

Actions
- Develop digital equipment (notebook, projector, 
speakers and microphone, digital cameras and 
y  30  tablets)  at  initial-level  kindergartens  and 
prioritize  their  use  in  five-year  old  preschool 
classroom.
- Furnish schools with the necessary technological 
infrastructure  to  build  the  required  skills  and 
competences  in  public  primary  and  secondary 
schools in the City though Plan Sarmiento.
- Raise interest in programming and technology 
among students of the last years of secondary 
school.
-  Train  programmers  every  year  with  fast  job 
placement through Codo a codo.
-  Furnish  primary  and  secondary  schools  with 
technologies  and  digital  spaces  to  implement 
the  education  plans  (robotics,  programming, 
modeling and 3D printing, Arduino and design, 
among other technologies).
-  Implement  Management  Platforms,  Adaptive 
Platforms and digital content development for all 
levels.

TIMEFRAME

Short/Medium-term

STATUS
In progress

STAkEHOLDERS
- General Directorate of Education 
Technology (Ministry of Education and 
Innovation - MEIGC)
- Undersecretariat of Teaching Career and 
Professional Technical Training (Ministry of 
Education and Innovation - MEIGC)

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Social and urban integration

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Changes in macroeconomic trends

Speedy technological progress

INDICATORS
- Number of netbooks/tablets delivered.
- Number of digital workshops delivered.
- Number of schools with digital areas.
- Percentage of graduated students from 
Aprendé programando 
- Percentage of graduated students from 
Codo a Codo.
- Usage rate of learning platforms.

Pillar 2: Innovation, talent and opportunities

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.1:  
Guarantee inclusive quality education providing students the skills required by the jobs of the future.

SCHOOLS OF THE FUTURE

the  environment  where 

Understanding 
the 
education  community  develops  is  necessary 
to analyze the strategies to be implemented in 
order to achieve quality education. Furthermore, 
every  institution  should  deal  with  situations  of 
change,  for  instance,  changes  in  infrastructure 
(refurbishment  or  extensions)  that  may  affect 
students’ learning goals in the long term. Hence, 
the availability of basic furniture as well as top 
quality  classrooms  not  only  impacts  students’ 
learning, but also builds education spaces that 
promote  skills  development  of  children  and 
youth.

the  school  culture 

Transforming 
includes, 
therefore,  rethinking  institutional  logics  and 
dynamics,  not  only  at  curricular  level,  but  also 
at  infrastructure  level.  Building  new  schools 
requires  considering  what  type  of  spaces  will 
children and youth occupy and what quality and 
type of experience we want to offer them. Thus, 
we  propose  to  redesign  the  spaces  enabling 
the development of the skills of tomorrow and 
respond to students’ individual needs, promote 
curiosity  and  further  trust,  collaboration  and 
concentration,  together  with  the  Secondary 

School of the Future and Teachers of the Future 
initiatives.

Bringing  about 
the  appropriate  physical 
conditions  for  the  development  of  teaching 
activities  will  prompt  a  better  performance  of 
the education community in the transmission of 
knowledge and generate a suitable environment 
necessary to obtain a first quality job.   

Actions
-  Adjust  existing  school  infrastructure  to  new 
learning modes.
- Incorporate flexible furniture and infrastructure 
for the new public schools of the City.
-  Open  schools  on  Saturdays  for  participatory 
activities to include the neighborhood community 
in  the  activities  and  offer  students  a  space  to 
develop themselves and sharing outside school. 

2.1.3

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
In progress with new resilient actions

STAkEHOLDERS
- University of Buenos Aires School of 
Architecture, Design and Urban Development. 
- Ministry of Urban Development and Transport.
- Undersecretariat of Economic and Financial 
Management and Resources Administration 
(Ministry of Education and Innovation - MEIGC).

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Security and risk managements

Environment and sustainability

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Unsuitable infrastructure

INDICATORS
- Number of new schools with 
infrastructure and flexible spaces.
- Number of existing schools with adjusted 
infrastructure and flexible spaces.

63

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.1:  
Guarantee inclusive quality education providing students the skills required by the jobs of the future.

2.1.4

TEACHERS OF THE FUTURE

The  future  of  education  depends  on  having 
sound,  autonomous,  critical,  creative  and 
committed  teachers  and  professors.  However, 
the  social  perception  of  the  profession  is 
reflected in the difficulty to call for the candidates 
with the appropriate profile (CIPPEC, 2014).

training 

requires 

teachers’ 

the 
Hence, 
incorporation  of  general  knowledge  and 
continuous update to conduct an appealing and 
motivating class. Innovation, social responsibility 
and  human  talent  development  converge  into 
a  student-centered  teaching  model,  favoring 
the  building  of  knowledge  in  a  dialectical 
relationship  among  students  as  members  of  a 
learning community.

resilient  city 

Thinking  about  a 
implies 
anticipating  future  challenges  linked  to  new 
jobs and the development of the skills required 
therefore.  It  also  entails  rethinking  the  way 
in  which  teachers  are  trained,  stay  up-to-
date  and  manage  learning  situations  for  their 
students.  This  strategy  proposes  fostering  the 
transferring  of  skills  for  students  to  resolve 
problems  and  guarantee  complete  educational 
careers,  through  innovative  methodologies  for 
transferring knowledge and skills. The teachers 
of tomorrow will master teaching from an expert 

and disciplinary knowledge while learning from 
the  sociocultural  exchanges  generated  by  the 
interaction with students.

Actions
-  Raise  teaching  vocation  among  secondary 
school  students  through  the  Elegí  Enseñar 
(Choose to Teach) program.
- Train teachers through the Teachers School.
- Bring forward teaching practice immersion for 
teacher  training  students  in  Primary  Education 
through Programa Estímulo (Stimulus Program).  
-  Develop  teachers’  skills  in  the  use  of  new 
technologies.
-  Learn  about  students’  learning  time  and 
preferences to design contents and programs.
- Incorporate experiential learning as a teaching 
instrument. 
- Create an innovative district university to train 
teachers in preschool and continuous education.
-  Generate  an  evaluation  system  for  teachers 
training institutes.
-  Teacher  training  institutes  y  Specialists  in 
education and evaluation.

TIMEFRAME

Short/Medium-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
- Undersecretariat of Teaching Career and 
Professional Technical Training (Ministry of 
Education and Innovation - MEIGC)
- Undersecretariat of Pedagogical Coordination 
and Educational Equity (Ministry of Education 
and Innovation -MEIGC)
- Undersecretariat of Education Planning 
and Innovation (Ministry of Education and 
Innovation - MEIGC)  
- Teacher training institutes 
- Specialists in education and evaluation

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Lack of teaching vocation

Increase of exponential technologies

Late incorporation of technological  
changes into schools

Change of macroeconomic trends

INDICATORS
- Number of new teachers included in the 
education system.
- Number of participants in the Elegí Enseñar 
(Choose to Teach) and Programa Estímulo 
(Stimulus Program) programs.
- Number of graduates from the university 
system.
- Number of teachers trained in graduate and 
post-graduate studies.
- District performance in educational quality 
evaluations.

Pillar 2: Innovation, talent and opportunities

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.1:  
Guarantee inclusive quality education providing students the skills required by the jobs of the future.

Therefore,  predictive  analysis  modes  are 
valuable  tools  allowing  risk  assessment  from 
a certain point of view and helping to increase 
communities’  resilience.  Using  data  mining 
and  machine  learning  techniques,  a  model  to 
anticipate stresses and take preventive actions 
to  avoid  their  escalation  will  be  developed.  In 
this  way,  control  boards  will  be  used  to  view 
the  specific  situation  for  which  the  tool  was 
designed.  In  turn,  the  control  board  will  help 
analyze trends and improve our understanding 
of the phenomenon to strengthen City systems.

PREDICTIVE ANALYSIS

The  quantity  and  availability  of  data  produced 
by  citizens  and  government  as  well  as  the 
knowledge and existing tools for their use, are 
constantly  increasing.  In  this  context,  and  in 
order  to  better  understand  the  problems  and 
needs of residents to respond more effectively 
and efficiently, the city of Buenos Aires develops 
predictive analysis as tools that help the different 
areas of government to make better evidence-
based decisions. 

Predictive analyses involve the use of historical 
data to search for trends and identify patterns; 
according  to  which  needs  can  be  recognized, 
eventual problems may be prevented, priorities 
may be defined and/or the way in which services 
are  provided  to  citizens  may  be  reorganized. 
On  the  other  hand,  predictive  analytics  enable 
the construction of flexible strategies that may 
adapt their response to changing circumstances 
learning  from  past  experiences  for  decision 
making.

2.1.5

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
- Secretariat of Science, Technology and 
Innovation (Ministry of Education and 
Innovation - MEIGC)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Social and urban integration

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Uncoordinated information systems

65

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.2: 
Promote learning opportunities favoring access to quality jobs 

2.2.1

SEGUNDA VUELTA ACTIVA (ACTIVE JOB REINSERTION)

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
In progress with new resilient actions

STAkEHOLDERS
- Human resources agencies
- Ministry of Economy and Finance
- Ministry of Government
- Secretariat of Science, Technology and 
Innovation (Ministry of Education and 
Innovation - MEIGC)
- Private sector

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Diversity, gender and coexistence

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Unemployment

Displaced population/migrants

Unsuitable infrastructure

Lack of investment

INDICATORS
- Number of partnerships with companies
- Number of training practices during the 
course
- Percentage of people over 45 incorporated 
into the market after the course

Pillar 2: Innovation, talent and opportunities

In  2016,  800,000  Argentines  over  45  years  old 
sought to return to work unsuccessfully (ILO). In 
addition,  various  studies  agree  that  80%  of  job 
offers are for people under that age. Being over 45 
years old means having important qualities for the 
market (Adecco - employability after 45). However, 
the private sector does not consider people over 
45 as a possible group to work proactively.

that  promote  employability  through  internships 
for those who are part of the program, once the 
course or workshop is completed.  Furthermore, 
it  is  also  aimed  at  developing  inclusion  policies 
by  communicating  to  businesses  the  benefits 
of  incorporating  this  population:  lower  turnover, 
aware  of  future  expectations  or  high  level  of 
commitment, among others.

Thus,  Segunda  Vuelta  (Job  Reinsertion)  is  an 
initiative aimed at people between 35 and 60 years 
old in the City, to contribute to the strengthening 
of  different  skills  that  favor  the  reinsertion  of 
those affected by the transformation of the labor 
market  resulting  from  technological  advances. 
In this way, anchored in the existing project, the 
resilience  strategy  proposes  a  public-private 
partnership to develop alliances with companies 

In this regard, the partnership between government 
and  businesses  emerges  as  an  opportunity  to 
work on both, re-employment and the necessary 
restructuring ahead of the accelerated changes in 
the labor market. The resilient view in this proposal 
promotes the acquisition of technical knowledge 
and  soft  skills  and  increases  the  chances  of 
employability and professional growth

REFERENCES
1. Tomaya: Provides employment opportunities for seniors and the disabled in companies through the 
creation of a human resources bank. 
2. Tulsa: Promotes the implementation of the “Ban-the-Box” executive order to lead hiring practices for those 
requiring a second chance.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.2: 
Promote learning opportunities favoring access to quality jobs 

JOBS OF TOMORROW 

In  the  City,  39%  of  companies  have  difficulties 
covering  technical  or  operational  positions. 
These  are  connected  to  the  lack  of  technical 
skills,  lack  of  applicants  and  the  lack  of 
experience  (INET-GCBA,  2016).  In  turn,  sectors 
that are expected to be more dynamic and have 
a larger labor demand are the pharmaceutical, 
software,  communications,  construction  and 
health industries (INET-GCBA, 2016).

The  city  integrates  training  with  job-specific 
knowledge  through  the  Vocational  Training 
Centers (CFP for its acronym in Spanish) so that 
people can access the labor market. The CFPs 
facilitate the development of an educational and 
employment future by offering trade courses and 
possibilities for social and educational inclusion.

in 

The strategy seeks to promote training, education 
and  certification 
the  above-mentioned 
sectors  through  scholarships,  initial  courses 
and  professional  practices  that  complement 
the CFPs to raise awareness about the demand 
and  the  characteristics  they  require.  They  also 
encourage the career choice by communicating 
the  competitive  advantage  resulting  from  the 
inclusion in the sector.

In  addition,  the  City  implements  practices  so 
that  technical  school  students  consolidate, 

integrate  or  expand  their  skills  and  knowledge 
in  accordance  with  the  professional  profile  for 
which they are being trained. This facilitates the 
transition from school into the future insertion in 
the labor market.

Therefore,  stimulating  and  promoting  training 
in  these  sectors  can  make  a  difference  by 
generating  talent  adjusted  to  the  possibilities 
for the city’s production matrix and the jobs of 
tomorrow.

Actions
- Certify community child and senior care providers.
-Provide 
training  grants  on  programming, 
software, sustainable building, nursing and new 
technologies.
- Professionalization internships to approach the 
world of work from experiences linked to school 
learning.
- Promote equal opportunities in labor insertion 
for adolescents from vulnerable groups.
- Organize meetings between scientists and the 
education community to motivate the scientific 
vocation and promote the involvement of women 
in these professions.

2.2.2

TIMEFRAME

Medium/Long-term

STATUS
In progress with new resilient actions

STAkEHOLDERS
- Secretariat of Science, Technology and 
Innovation (Ministry of Education and  
Innovation - MEIGC)
- Undersecretariat of Economic Development 
(Ministry of Economy and Finance - MEyF) 
- Undersecretariat of Educational Planning and 
Innovation (Ministry of Education and  
Innovation - MEIGC)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Social and urban integration

Diversity, gender and coexistence

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Unemployment

Displaced population/migrants

Change in macroeconomic trends

Economic inequity

INDICATORS
- Number of people trained
- Number of certificates granted
- Number of grants awarded
- Number of courses provided

67

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.2: 
Promote learning opportunities favoring access to quality jobs 

2.2.3

BA EMPRENDE (BA ENTREPRENEUR ACADEMY)

TIMEFRAME

Short-term

STATUS
In progress

STAkEHOLDERS
- Secretariat of Science, Technology and 
Innovation (Ministry of Education and 
Innovation - MEIGC)
Undersecretariat of Economic Development 
(Ministry of Economy and Finance - MEyF)

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Economic/financial crisis

Economic inequity 

Unemployment

INDICATORS
- Number of training grants awarded
- Number of incubated projects
- Number of projects financed with seed 
money

Pillar 2: Innovation, talent and opportunities

Globalization  and  technological  changes  have 
presented small and medium-sized enterprises 
as  engines  of  innovation,  as  they  can  be 
important  vehicles  for  spilling  knowledge  of 
ideas, skills, products and strategies (Dahlstrand 
and  Stevenson,  2010).  In  this  sense,  start-ups 
are an important source of employment growth, 
introduction  of 
innovations,  revitalization  of 
the  productive  fabric,  re-launching  of  regional 
spaces  and  channeling  of  society’s  creative 
energies (César and Villalobos, 2014).

In  this  context,  Buenos  Aires  has  developed 
programs  for  the  different  stages  of  business 
to  promote  the  creation  and  management  of 
enterprises  that  foster  entrepreneurial  and 
innovative  talent  as  an  engine  of  economic 
development for the City.

to  boost  entrepreneurship).  These  programs 
are  intended  for  all  those  entrepreneurs  who 
start  their  projects  or  enhance  current  ones 
by  developing  a  minimum  feasible  product/
service.  Furthermore,  Ciudad  Emprendedora 
(Entrepreneurial City) works on liaison programs 
that  can  catalyze  the  relationship  between 
entrepreneurs  and  other  stakeholders  in  the 
society.

Thus, the support from the City government as 
a formal network is essential at any stage of the 
development process. In addition, the networks 
thus  created  work  as  a  bridge  between  the 
structure  of  opportunities  and  entrepreneurs, 
and between them and the resources necessary 
to enhance and develop their project.

Actions
-  Strengthen  the  entrepreneurial  ecosystem  of 
the city of Buenos Aires by: 

- teaching entrepreneurial skills at school;

- developing and promoting entrepreneurship;

- collaborating in the search of resources to 
implement it.

To stimulate and promote the strengthening and 
consolidation  of  ventures  in  the  City,  Buenos 
Aires  provides  customized  support,  financial 
assistance and access to a workspace through 
programs 
like  Academia  BA  Emprende  (BA 
Entrepreneur Academy), a free training program 
focused  on  entrepreneurial  skills  and  dynamic 
methodologies), 
Integración 
Emprendedora, 
Integration 
Program - PIE for its acronym in Spanish, a free 
training  in  basic  concepts  of  entrepreneurship 
such 
negotiation 
techniques,  online  marketing,  etc.;  access  to 
new  markets  and  mentoring)  and  IncuBAte 
(customized 
support,  financial  assistance 
and  the  possibility  of  accessing  a  workspace 

Pograma 
de 
(Entrepreneurial 

as  business  models, 

REFERENCES
1. Barcelona Activa: Promote entrepreneurship and assist companies providing support services to start 
a business through training activities, support to access funding and other resources for entrepreneurs to 
create a new sustainable and quality business.

2.  Glasgow  Challenge  Lab:  Support  business  development  and  new  technologies  through  a  number  of 
hackathons for young people identifying clever solutions to address the specific challenges of resilience.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.2: 
Promote learning opportunities favoring access to quality jobs 

Business Opportunities Map (action in progress)

The  business  opportunities  map  (MOC,  for  its  acronym  in  Spanish)  of  Buenos  Aires  is  aimed  at  promoting  the  development  of 
entrepreneurs with an online tool that enhances the economic development of the City. This open platform analyzes large volumes of 
data from strategic sources and allows risks detection and potential market opportunities identification.

69

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.3: 
Foster innovation and generation of economic development opportunities of the City

2.3.1

URBAN INNOVATION FUND

TIMEFRAME

Long-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
- Secretariat of Science, Technology and 
Innovation (Ministry of Education and 
Innovation - MEIGC)
- Secretariat of Management Planning, 
Evaluation and Control (Office of the Chief 
of Staff - JGM)
- Private sector
- Undersecretariat of Economic Development 
(Ministry of Economy and Finance - MEyF)
- Undersecretariat of Micro, Small and 
Medium-Sized Enterprises (Office of the 
Deputy Chief of Government - VJG)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Social and urban integration

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Scarcely diversified economy

Lack of investment

Changes in macroeconomic trends

INDICATORS
- Number of startups financed
- Number of R&D projects submitted

Pillar 2: Innovation, talent and opportunities

There  are  many  efforts  in  the  City  to  develop 
venture  capital  from  incubators,  training  and 
investors  networks.  Future  challenges  and 
accelerated  changes  transforming  the  cities 
will  require  even  greater  development  of 
innovation  industries  for  these  economies  to 
meet the socio-economic and cultural needs of 
its citizens as well.

In this sense, we propose the development of 
a reference and promoting body that supports, 
fosters and strengthens innovation with social 
impact  and  reinforces  public  policies  related 
efforts.  The  body  will  have  public-private 
funding  and  its  mission  will  be  to  promote, 
finance  and  accelerate 
that 
resolve  the  great  challenges  of  the  City  such 
as those connected to future employment and 

innovations 

inequality.  At  the  same  time,  the  Fund  will  be 
the  cross-disciplinary  center  for  research  and 
promotion of innovative social projects and will 
allocate resources in accordance with the City’s 
strategic  challenges  by  analyzing  ideas  and 
emerging technologies to suit the resolution of 
these challenges.

Hence,  developing  a  space  that  generates 
and  pulls  innovation,  and  channels  funds  for 
research  and  development,  positions  Buenos 
Aires  as  an  innovation  reference  in  Latin 
America and as a new global hub.

Cities compete to become innovation and technological leaders. The United kingdom, for example, 
opted for technological entrepreneurships as engines of development. According to Tech City Uk, it 
has already invested USD 37 billion in digital business, 47% of which is concentrated in London. These 
findings are the result of government decisions that boost investment in risk ventures. Thereby, for 
example, Seed Enterprise Investment Scheme (SEIS) was developed as a scheme of tax incentives 
designed for the government to share with the private sector the risk of investing in new companies.

REFERENCE
United Kingdom: NESTA funds new ideas that are facing current great challenges in a practical and creative 
way. Its focus is on areas where the combination of digital technology, empowered people and better use of 
data and evidence can have the greatest impact.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.3: 
Foster innovation and generation of economic development opportunities of the City

INNOVATION PARK

There  are  barriers  in  Latin  America  and  the 
Caribbean  that  prevent  countries  from  taking 
advantage of the power of knowledge, innovation 
and  entrepreneurship-intensive 
industries  for 
economic development. On average, 0.78% of the 
region’s GDP is spent on R&D, well below the 2.4% 
used by OECD countries in 2011 (MIF).

With  the  purpose  of  encouraging  research  and 
knowledge industry (higher education and applied 
scientific  research),  the  City  is  building  in  the 
northern area the Innovation Park, while creating 
new  green  areas,  and  facilitating  connectivity 
and  mobility.  The  Park  will  work  as  a  campus 
bringing together public and private institutions. 
An  ecosystem  of  innovation  and  research  will 
be  created  through  this  combination,  bringing 
together students, scientists and scholars.

The creation of the Innovation Park promotes, on 
the  one  hand,  the  attraction,  development  and 
retention of talent from surrounding universities, 
favoring further scientific research and increasing 
the emergence of new related ventures. On the 
other  hand,  its  development  means  integrating 
the University of Buenos Aires to the urban fabric 
and increasing public green spaces for the City.

Actions
- Establish organizations in the Innovation Park.

REFERENCE
Barcelona - @22 Districte de la Innovació. With the approval of a new urban planning, the city transformed the 
Poblenou industrial area into a center of new activity. It supports further buildings, more green spaces and 
use of social housing and replaces industrial activity with offices and services related to new technologies and 
knowledge.

2.3.2

TIMEFRAME

Long-term

STATUS
In progress 

STAkEHOLDERS
- Secretariat of Science, Technology and
Innovation (Ministry of Education and 
Innovation – MEIGC) 
- Innovation Park SPU (Office of the Chief of 
Staff – JGM) 

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Social and urban integration

Environment and sustainability

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Unsuitable infrastructure 

Economic inequity 

Unemployment

INDICATORS
- Number of organizations based in the 
Innovation Park

71

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.3: 
Foster innovation and generation of economic development opportunities of the City

2.3.3

PUBLIC DATA POLICY

TIMEFRAME

Long-term

STATUS
In progress

STAkEHOLDERS
- General Secretariat and International 
Relations
- Secretariat of Science, Technology and 
Innovation (Ministry of Education and 
Innovation - MEIGC)
- Undersecretariat of Systems and Processes 
(Office of the Chief of Staff - JGM)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES
Social and urban integration

Security and risk management

Environment and sustainability

Diversity, gender and coexistence

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Change in macroeconomic trends

Unsuitable systems

Unsuitable infrastructure

INDICATORS
- Number of datasets collected
- Number of datasets published in the 
website
- Number of datasets downloaded from the 
website

Pillar 2: Innovation, talent and opportunities

of data to generate new business opportunities, 
promote  evidence-based  decision-making,  or 
respond and meet the needs of citizens. 

Actions
-  Develop  a  table  of  data  to  generate  and 
consolidate  an  internal  community  of  data 
producers and users within the government.
- Carry out a survey and inventory of public data.
- Promote data-based decision-making.
-  Boost  and  extend  the  features  of  the  data.
buenosaires.gob.ar portal.
- Promote data reuse economies.
- Promote the use of data by the private sector 
and the community.
- Define guidelines for public data governance.

Data  are  a  valuable  and  strategic  asset,  and 
the  basic  input  for  decision  making.  The  City 
produces day by day a large amount of public 
data, of varying quality and quantity, which are 
generally used for specific and limited purposes. 
Quality  and  easy  to  navigate  data  are  also  a 
key  ally  in  the  generation,  development  and 
implementation  of  public  policies  that  build 
resilience.

In  this  regard,  it  is  important  to  promote 
appropriate  organization  in  the  generation  and 
transfer  of  data  between  areas  of  government 
(knowing  who  produces  what  data),  and  the 
generation  of  protocols  that  facilitate  their 
exchange, especially in a context where public 
policies  are  increasingly  interdisciplinary.  This 
data  policy  will  generate  a  positive  impact  on 
decision-making and in the quality, effectiveness 
and efficiency of resident-oriented initiatives.

In  this  context,  the  strategy  highlights  the 
need  for  coordination  to  further  collaboration 
regarding data use practices. Thus, the BA Data 
initiative  aims  at  promoting  a  data-focused 
culture, which will improve public policy quality 
and  citizen  participation,  and  encourage  the 
development  of  new  data-based  opportunities. 
Data opening seeks to highlight the importance 

REFERENCE
Spain: Since 2009, the Spanish government open data initiative seeks to promote the culture of data opening. 
This initiative aims to create the conditions for the development of the public sector data reuse market, as well 
as support administrative units to post it in the most reuse-friendly manner.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.3: 
Foster innovation and generation of economic development opportunities of the City

SOCIAL AND SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT

Governments  acquire  a  wide  range  of  goods 
and services to implement policies, turning them 
into influential agents of economic development. 
Many  have  thus  observed  that  through  their 
procurement  systems  not  only  supply  goals 
can  be  met,  but  also  plenty  of  opportunities 
can  be  offered  to  promote  and  contribute  to 
other  objectives,  boosting  a  more  sustainable 
development.

In this sense, Compras Sustentables (Sustainable 
Procurement) was developed by the government 
of the city of Buenos Aires as a process whereby 
needs  are  met  using  resources  optimally  so 
that  benefits  are  generated  not  only  for  the 
organization, but also for society and the economy, 
minimizing  in  turn  damage  to  the  environment 
(GOV.Uk,  2016).  Governments,  therefore,  create 
incentives for the market to produce and supply 
these  goods  and  services  and  reach  more 
consumers, while promoting the improvement of 
the chain of value by example.

Therefore, the aim is to promote the procurement 
of  services  by  the  government  from  social 

companies  and  cooperatives  that  employ  and 
train vulnerable populations and generate social 
impact.  At  the  same  time,  public  tenders  may 
be  used  to  increase  the  participation  of  such 
organizations  in  the  process  and  encourage 
their  procurement.  Social  procurement  will  thus 
contribute to the promotion of inclusive practices, 
strengthening  those  policies  that  guarantee 
decent,  non-discriminatory  and  fair  working 
conditions.

Actions
- Conduct a workshop on sustainable procurement 
for  CSOs  and  cooperatives  to  encourage  their 
inclusion as suppliers of the city of Buenos Aires 
government.
- Promote the added value of procurement with 
social impact.
- Involve SMEs, MSMEs and social entrepreneurs 
as government suppliers.

2.3.4

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
- City Housing Institute (Office of the Chief of 
Staff - JGM)
- Ministry of Human Development and Habitat
- Ministry of Economy and Finance

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Social and urban integration

Environment and sustainability

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Marginalization of young people

Displaced population/migrants

Poverty

Unemployment

Lack of social cohesion

INDICATORS
- Number of organizations with social 
impact involved in sustainable procurement

73

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.3: 
Foster innovation and generation of economic development opportunities of the City 

2.3.5

INDUSTRIES OF THE FUTURE

learning that stimulate students, teacher training 
becomes  a  profession  that  requires  skills  to 
conduct an appealing and motivating lesson.

Therefore, given the advance of automation and 
the  development  of  information  technology, 
granting  training  scholarships  in  the  various 
sectors,  offering  certifications  and  loans  for 
small and medium-sized enterprises to develop 
even  further  their  economies,  fosters  and 
promotes the expansion of these sectors, which 
distinguishes Buenos Aires as a city that attracts 
and  generates  talent,  and  supports  a  more 
sustainable urban development adapted to the 
practical needs of the local population.

The adjustment of cities to changes in the future 
of  employment  is  an  essential  condition  for 
sustainable and equitable growth. Technological 
transformations  foster  the  emergence  of  new 
jobs  and  sectors  countering  labor  substitution 
processes,  generating  huge  opportunities  for 
development  and  well-being.  Sectors  such 
as  the  care  economy,  tourism,  gastronomy, 
education and arts emerge as potential engines 
of economic development.

Population  ageing  and  the  shortage  of  nurses 
turns  care  into  a  booming  economy  with  high 
demand. In turn, transforming the Buenos Aires 
cuisine into a symbol within the region becomes 
an  opportunity  for  the  growth  of  tourism  and 
denotes  the  potential  of  the  City  to  establish 
itself  as  a  destination  in  Latin  America.  In 
addition,  culture  and  creativity  are  identified 
as  key  elements  to  promote  people-centered 
sustainable  development  (2030  agenda  -  SDG 
11)  and  talent.  Finally,  given  the  new  ways  of 

TIMEFRAME

Medium/Long-term

STATUS
In progress with new resilient actions

STAkEHOLDERS
- Ministry of Culture
- General Secretariat and International 
Relations
- Undersecretariat of Citizen Wellbeing (Office 
of the Deputy Chief of Government -VJG)
- Undersecretariat of Economic Development 
(Ministry of Economy and Finance - MEyF)
- Undersecretariat of Micro, Small and Medium-
Sized Enterprises (Office of the Deputy Chief 
of Government - VJG) 
- Undersecretariat of Health Planning (Ministry 
of Health - MSAL)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Diversity, gender and coexistence

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Unemployment

Scarcely diversified economy

Aged population

Economic inequity

INDICATORS
- Number of grants awarded
- Number of tourists visiting the City
- Number of graduated nurses/caretakers
- Number of major food fairs organized in 
Buenos Aires
- Number of companies based in districts

Pillar 2: Innovation, talent and opportunities

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.3: 
Foster innovation and generation of economic development opportunities of the City 

Actions
- Award training grants in the various sectors.

- Certify unemployed female community caretakers 
living in the City for early childhood and senior 
citizens.

- Grant credits to SMEs developing care, tourism, 
gastronomy and arts industries.

-  Be  member  of  the  UNESCO  Creative  Cities 
Network.

-  Improve  accessibility,  security,  lighting  and 
equipment in public spaces of the Arts District 
to promote cultural tours.

-  Provide  the  Pase  Cultural  (Cultural  Pass)  to 
young people and teachers from public schools 
in the City.

-  Bring  culture  to  all  areas  of  the  City  through 
Barrios Creativos (Creative Neighborhoods).

- Organize Feria Masticar (food fair) on an annual 
basis.

75

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.3: 
Foster innovation and generation of economic development opportunities of the City 

2.3.6

NEW COLLABORATIVE ECONOMIES

practices,  and  allows  the  generation  of  new 
interactions and opportunities.
In  this  context,  the  Resilience  Strategy  is 
aimed  at  placing  Buenos  Aires,  as  a  global 
city  and  potential  hub  of  new  technologies,  to 
anticipate the challenges of the future and the 
landing  of  these  new  economies  that  could 
generate disruptions in its development matrix. 
A  regulatory  framework  will  be  developed  to 
manage  this  new  way  of  work  and  service 
production  in  the  market  to  encourage  good 
relations  among  traditional  services  and  thus 
expand supply and boost development.

Thanks to technological progress, many people 
can  work  independently,  connect  with  others, 
share  resources,  and  generate  non-traditional 
work alternatives by using tools available on the 
internet. Thus, new business and labor dynamics 
emerge from mobile applications that are part of 
digital sharing economies.
Today,  smartphones  provide 
information  to 
consolidate  new  companies  whose  business 
model uses this structure. However, the success 
of these applications with even greater potential 
for  growth  and  expansion  has  become  a  clear 
challenge  for  many  cities  regarding  transport, 
tourism  and  trade.  In  Europe,  the  business 
volume  of  the  so-called  sharing  economy  or 
collaborative  economy  will  be  worth  USD  570 
billion by 2025 (PwC, 2016).
These changes have an impact on all areas and 
sectors of the economy. Thus, the combination 
of  social  changes  in  the  way  work  is  focused 
due  to  the  possibilities  brought  by  technology, 
challenges  traditional  business  management 

TIMEFRAME

Medium/Long-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
- Secretariat of Science, Technology and 
Innovation (Ministry of Education and 
Innovation - MEIGC)
- Undersecretariat of Economic Development 
(Ministry of Economy and Finance - MEyF)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Diversity, gender and coexistence

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Changes in macroeconomic trends

Pillar 2: Innovation, talent and opportunities

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  2.3: 
Foster innovation and generation of economic development opportunities of the City 

improve their experience according to economic 
impact, per cap spending, length of stay, type of 
course and reasons of choice.

Actions
-  Promote  the  City  and  educational  institutions 
abroad.
- Deliver welcome kits and conduct the event Es 
tu día (It’s your day).
- Organize free activities.

STUDY BA

The international mobility of students between 18 
and 35 years old stimulates talent and knowledge 
flow worldwide. For young people, an academic, 
cultural immersion or internship trip is a turning 
point in their training process, preparing them to 
coexist in this interconnected world and develop 
the skills necessary to adapt to new social and 
cultural environments.

During 2017, 61,100 visitors from different parts of 
the world chose to travel to Buenos Aires to study, 
and other thousand young people were granted 
the  “holiday  and  work”  visa.  These  students 
generate  revenues  for  the  City  and  become,  in 
turn,  ambassadors  for  Buenos  Aires  throughout 
the rest of the world by sharing their experiences 
when they return to their hometowns.

Study BA is a program that provides international 
students  arriving 
in  the  City  support  and 
integration  with  local  talent,  assisting  them  in 
generating  a  connection  between  them,  their 
University, their classmates and the City. It also 
develops a platform to measure the phenomenon 
of  international  students’  incoming  mobility  to 

2.3.7

TIMEFRAME

Short-term

STATUS
In progress

STAkEHOLDERS
- General Secretariat and International 
Relations

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Diversity, gender and coexistence

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Marginalization of young people

Lack of social cohesion

Income for the City

INDICATORS
- Number of agreements signed with 
universities
- Number of welcoming kits delivered
Income for the City
- Number of visas granted

77

PILLAR 3

Environment and
Sustainability

A sustainable City that seeks better quality of life 
for its residents, committed to preserving its 
environment and using its resources eﬃciently.

3.1 DEVELOP AN INTEGRATED SYSTEM OF GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE

SUSTAINABLE
CITIES AND
COMMUNITIES

CLIMATE 
ACTION

3.2 PROMOTE THE CITY’S ENERGY SUSTAINABILITY

AFFORDABLE AND 
CLEAN ENERGY

INDUSTRY, 
INNOVATION AND 
INFRASTRUCTURE 

SUSTAINABLE 
CITIES AND 
COMMUNITIES

RESPONSIBLE 
CONSUMPTION 
AND PRODUCTION

CLIMATE 
ACTION

3.3 IMPLEMENT AN INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT POLICY

SUSTAINABLE 
CITIES AND 
COMMUNITIES

RESPONSIBLE 
CONSUMPTION 
AND PRODUCTION

79

“Innovating in the development of new quality green 
spaces -such as green walls and roofs or privately-
owned  publicly-accessible  green  spaces-  and 
increasing urban tree-planting are strategic elements 
to build a more resilient City.”

Current Situation

As any large global city, the city of Buenos Aires is responsible for the emission of greenhouse gases (GHG) that lead to 
significant climate changes. These are reflected in average temperature increase, more frequent heat waves and extreme 
rainfall.

According to the greenhouse gas inventory (APrA, 2015), the City’s total amounted to 13,113,673 tCO2eq in 2015. Thus, Buenos 
Aires revealed that the energy (58%), transport (28%) and urban solid waste (14%) sectors are the major sources of carbon 
emissions.

The city of Buenos Aires generates more than 6,700 tons of waste a day. More than 55% is recovered, while the remaining 
portion is treated by the state-owned Company for Ecological Coordination in the Metropolitan Area (CEAMSE, for its acronym 
in Spanish), burying 3,017 tons/day. Pursuant to Act No. 1854 on “Zero Waste”, waste separation is a legal obligation requiring 
the implementation of measures aimed at reducing generation, recovering and recycling of waste. The CEAMSE thus built 
the first mechanical and biological treatment plant in Argentina in the North III environmental complex to treat 20% of City 
waste in order to reduce the amount of waste disposed in the landfill.

On the other hand, a sustainable city has quality green spaces, strongly contributing to mitigating the effects of climate 
change. Population growth and densification of urban space in the City generate new challenges in terms of green space per 
capita, which is now around 5.9 m2 (APrA, 2015). In this sense, innovating in the development of new quality green spaces 
-such as green walls and roofs or privately owned publicly-accessible green spaces- and increasing urban tree planting are 
strategic elements to build a more resilient City.

Furthermore, Buenos Aires internationally pledged to become a carbon neutral city by 2050, which implies a drastic reduction 
in daily emissions. In this context, 4 priority actions were identified at global level to promote climate action in the cities: 
decarbonize  the  network  (renewable  energy  generation),  optimize  buildings’  energy  efficiency,  allow  clean  mobility  and 
improve waste management (McKinsey Center for Business and Environment and C40 Cities, 2017).

Therefore, the City is implementing various strategies to promote energy sustainability, expand recycling capacity (by means 
of a comprehensive waste management policy), and increase green infrastructure and sustainable building.

The resilience strategy incorporates a metropolitan vision to waste management and seeks to promote energy consumption 
reduction  as  well  as  the  development  of  new  and  enjoyable  green  spaces  that,  by  improving  the  quality  of  life  for  all 
residents, help to build a sustainable, modern city committed to the preservation of its environment.

81

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  3.1: 
Develop an integrated system of green infrastructure 

3.1.1

GREEN ROOFS IN SCHOOLS

TIMEFRAME

Medium/Long-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
- Ministry of Environment and Public Spaces 
- Education for Sustainability SPU (Ministry 
of Education and Innovation - MEIGC)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Innovation, talent and opportunities

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Climate change

Lack of green spaces

Environmental degradation

Loss of biodiversity

INDICATORS 
- Number of schools with green walls  
and roofs
- Number of schools with Green School 
certificate

Pillar 3: Environment and sustainability

With the aim of contributing to climate change 
mitigation  and  adaptation,  and  based  on  the 
Ministry  of  Education  and  Innovation  Green 
Schools Program, the City carried out a study on 
the  installation  of  green  walls  and  roofs  in  146 
school buildings in communes 3, 5 and 10. These 
systems allow to increase green areas available 
in  the  City  and  contribute,  in  turn,  to  reduce 
GHG  emissions,  the  risk  of  flooding,  the  urban 
heat  island  effect  and  the  quality  of  the  air  as 
well as providing innovative educational spaces. 
The purpose of this study is to learn about the 
feasibility of installing green walls and roofs on 
selected school buildings, as well as the suitable 
type for each of them.

The study aims at becoming the starting point 
to  enhance  environmental  education  and 
management  actions  under  the  framework  of 
the Green Schools Program such as the school 
gardens  project  and  the  “Green  Schools” 
certificate.  The  installation  of  green  walls  and 
roofs would allow a better use of space and the 
development  of  new  educational  modalities. 
Furthermore,  the  analysis  tool  resulting  from 
this study may be used for decision-making in 
the  field  of  energy  efficiency  and  increase  of 
green spaces to mitigate the heat island effect, 
improve  air  quality,  increase  biodiversity  and 
further slowdown storm runoff.

“Green School” certificate
This acknowledgment is based on a voluntary scheme whereby the incorporation of contents, 
practices and teaching strategies promoting environmental education is self-managed. This 
proposal  is  aimed  at  all  public  and  private  managed  schools  of  all  levels  (initial,  primary, 
secondary school) in the City.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  3.1: 
Develop an integrated system of green infrastructure 

ARUP, tool developed under the framework of the study on the installation of 
green walls and roofs in schools for the city of Buenos Aires.

Green walls and roofs - Impact analysis and 
calculation tool 
The  tool  allows  filtering  schools  analyzed  according 
to  different  variables:  commune  to  which  they  belong, 
type of green wall/roof proposed, available roof surface 
and  location  characteristics  (floodable  area,  surface 
heat area, distance to green spaces, distance to means 
of  transport).  In  turn,  the  tool  shows  the  environmental 
impact derived from the implementation of the green roof 
and approximate cost.

School gardens
There are more than 580 schools in the City involved in 
the  School  Gardens  project.  These  educational  projects 
promote the creation and enhancement of school green 
spaces and their use as teaching tool is one of the most 
motivational  resources  to  stimulate  the  incorporation  of 
environmental education at school.

83

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  3.1: 
Develop an integrated system of green infrastructure 

3.1.2

URBAN TREE PLANTING PLAN AND METROPOLITAN BIO-CORRIDORS

TIMEFRAME

Short, Medium y Long-term

STATUS
In progress with new resilient actions

STAkEHOLDERS
- Environmental Protection Agency (Ministry 
of Environment and Public Space -MAyEP)
- Secretariat of Citizen Service and Claims 
(Office of the Chief of Staff - JGM)
- Private sector
- Civil society
- Undersecretariat of Public Space 
Maintenance (Ministry of Environment and 
Public Space - MAyEP) 
- City neighbors

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES
Social and urban integration

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Climate change

Lack of green spaces

Environmental degradation

Loss of biodiversity

INDICATORS 
- Number of new planted trees
- Total number of trees
- Number of agreements with the private 
sector and civil society
- Percentage of forest cover
- Reduction rate of surface heat focus areas 

Pillar 3: Environment and sustainability

One of the main actions this initiative promotes is 
the creation of bio-corridors that integrate urban 
landscape  into  green  infrastructure.  There  are 
different  levels  of  bio-corridors:  neighborhood-
city,  allowing  the  design  of  local  bio-corridors 
with  high  biodiversity  nodes  and  connectors 
between them, and at metropolitan region level, 
connecting the City with its Metropolitan Area of 
Buenos Aires (AMBA, for its acronym in Spanish) 
through  sustainable  green  infrastructure  that 
generate  mutual  benefits  for  the  neighbors  of 
both districts.

The  initiative  proposes  a  collaborative  strategy 
between  the  City  government,  the  private 
sector, civil society and neighbors, through the 
promotion of civic engagement and involvement 
in planting and maintenance of trees. 

Actions 
- Organize planting days in prioritized areas.

- Generate bio-corridors in AMBA next to bicycle 
paths promoting sustainable mobility.

- Generate bio-corridors on the river banks.

-  Engage  citizens,  civil  society  and  the  private 
sector to develop a resilient urban tree planting.

The  increase  in  global  temperature  also  affects 
Buenos  Aires.  Building  a  city  resilient  to  the 
effects  of  climate  change  implies  developing 
measures to minimize potential threats to human 
health, infrastructure and economic development.

As a compact city, Buenos Aires also faces the 
challenge  of  building  new  green  areas.  In  turn, 
the  City’s  population  growth  outlook  by  2050 
requires  developing  new  proposals  contributing 
to  generate  social  and  environmental  benefits 
promoting  Buenos  Aires  as  an  example  of 
sustainability.

In  this  sense,  the  Resilience  Strategy  wants  to 
highlight the importance of a robust urban tree 
planting  plan  (public  linear  trees  and  green 
spaces  tree  planting)  contributing  to  build  a 
city  more  resilient  to  the  effects  of  climate 
change and generate landscaping2, health3 and 
social  benefits4, as well as providing ecosystem 
services (temperature and microclimatic effects 
reduction,  air  pollutants  reduction  and  carbon 
absorption,  energy  consumption 
reduction, 
water  absorption  and  soil  erosion  reduction, 
noise  abatement  and  increase  of  biodiversity). 
The strategic location of trees in the cities can 
help  to  cool  the  air  between  2  and  8  degrees 
and reduce energy consumption.

The proposal for a resilient urban tree planting 
involves  the  selection  and  prioritization  of 
species  that  help  to  mitigate  the  effects  of 
climate  change,  the  prioritization  of  areas  with 
extreme weather events and the incorporation of 
native species. This proposal envisages also the 
maximum level of trees in the City, both in terms 
of quality and quantity.

REFERENCE 
Río de Janeiro: The Revitalizar Pracas-Bosques (Regenerate Parks and Woodlands) project aims at revitalizing 
and increasing tree density in 78 public parks, by planting a total of 50,000 trees.
Santiago de los Caballeros: The city conducts activities of reforestation and preservation of existing sinks 
with an annual reforestation of approximately 85,000 trees.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  3.1: 
Develop an integrated system of green infrastructure 

Benefits of urban trees

Reduction of 
temperature and 
microclimatic effects

Reduction of atmospheric 
pollutants and greenhouse 
gases

Reduction
of soil erosion

Water 
absorption

Health
improvement

Noise
absorption

Increase of 
biodiversity

Carbon absorption 
and capture

Energy costs
reduction

Further wellbeing

2  Reduction of cities artificialization. It provides contrast to buildings and contributes to the embellishment and identity of cities and their population.

3  Contribution to public health by improving the environment. It has positive effects on the psychic system by reducing stress.

4  Green areas support leisure, recreation and community living, reinforce culture and bring neighbors closer to nature.

85

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  3.1: 
Develop an integrated system of green infrastructure 

3.1.3

PRIVATELY OWNED PUBLICLY-ACESSSIBLE SPACES

addition, these spaces continue promoting the 
development of a city that appreciates citizens’ 
enjoyment and is committed to its environment.

Actions 
-  Remediate  environmental  liabilities  to  be 
appropriated by the City.

-  Promote  non-monetary  incentives  to  include 
POPS in new buildings.

-  Develop  urban  planning  agreements  and 
agreements with supermarkets, office buildings 
and other businesses.

TIMEFRAME

Medium/Long-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
- Ministry of Environment and Public Spaces 
- Ministry of Urban Development and 
Transport
- Private sector

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Lack of green spaces

INDICATORS
Number of m2/hectares of privately owned 
publicly-accessible green spaces.

The  growth  of  the  City  generates  the  need  to 
develop  new  quality  green  spaces  to  promote 
residents’  enjoyment  and  mitigate  the  effects 
of  climate  change.  Therefore,  the  purpose 
of  this  initiative  is  to  rethink  the  City  and  its 
design  to  improve  urban  environment  and  its 
infrastructure.

The  Resilience  strategy  proposes  generating 
partnerships with the private sector to promote 
and  incorporate  into  the  urban  fabric  privately 
owned  publicly-accessible  spaces  (POPS)  to 
complement the existing demand.

Privately owned publicly-accessible spaces are 
a  specific  type  of  open  space,  maintained  by 
private parties but open to residents of the City. 
In this sense, one of the main objectives of the 
initiative  is  to  promote  the  growth  of  privately 
owned publicly-accessible green spaces.

This  initiative  aims  at  generating  incentive 
schemes  to  promote  the  opening  of  privately-
owned spaces that can be used by the public. In 

REFERENCE 
New York: APOPS|MAS seeks to activate privately owned publicly-accessible spaces to encourage owners of 
these spaces and other owners to act as sponsors of tourist, recreational and academic programs.

Pillar 3: Environment and sustainability

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  3.1: 
Develop an integrated system of green infrastructure 

NEW GREEN AREAS

The  city  of  Buenos  Aires  has  a  system  of 
metropolitan  parks  and  squares  whose  layout 
responds to large urban plans of early 20th century. 
Population growth and urban densification have 
shown the importance of developing new green 
spaces. Following this, the current administration 
has pledged to add 110 new green hectares and 
to create 12 new squares.
There  are  also  large  interstitial  spaces  in  the 
City that have not yet achieved their ecosystem 
potential.  Therefore, 
initiative  aims  at 

this 

incorporating new, and enhance as many green 
spaces  as  possible  to  ensure  improved  access 
and quality of life to City residents.

Station Park and Block 66  (action in progress)
The  most  important  area  in  the  development  of  Block  66  is  intended  for  the  creation  of 
a new public square. This work is complemented by the Station Park, a new public space 
in  the  Sarmiento  railway  land  of  Once  station  providing  1.2  hectares  of  green  area  to  the 
neighborhoods of Balvanera and Almagro. Both spaces were created jointly with the neighbors 
through qualitative surveys that defined their will of having a new green space for recreation 
in their neighborhood.

REFERENCE 
Melbourne: The neighborhood project will provide 12 months training in developing skills, resources and advice 
to participating communities on how to turn underutilized lands into green spaces by incorporating training in 
design and project management. The action will transform 24 barely utilized spaces in 8 neighborhoods into useful 
community public spaces with the use of a tactical urban planning methodology.

3.1.4

TIMEFRAME

Short-term

STATUS
In progress

STAkEHOLDERS
- Ministry of Environment and Public Spaces 
- Ministry of Urban Development and Transport

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Diversity, gender and coexistence

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Lack of green spaces

Climate change

Environmental degradation

Loss of biodiversity

Lack of social cohesion

INDICATORS
- Number of new green areas
- Number of enhanced green areas

87

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  3.2: 
Promote the City’s energy sustainability

3.2.1

SUSTAINABLE HOMES AND BUILDINGS

TIMEFRAME

Medium/Long-term

STATUS
In progress with new resilient actions

STAkEHOLDERS
- Environmental Protection Agency (Ministry 
of Environment and Public Space - MAyEP)
- Ministry of Urban Development and 
Transport 

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES
Social and urban integration

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Climate change

Energy insecurity

INDICATORS 
- Number of sustainable construction 
training programs
- Percentage of refurbished properties over 
the total number of properties in the City

According  to  the  latest  City  Greenhouse  Gas 
Inventory, the energy sector was the area with 
the  largest  impact  on  emissions  by  producing 
58%  of  the  total  amount,  and  the  residential 
sector is the one generating the largest impact.

Globally,  the  promotion  of  sustainable  building 
and  the  rehabilitation  of  the  existing  building 
stock are identified as priority actions to achieve 
the  commitment  of  a  carbon  neutral  city  by 
2050.  The  reduction  of  energy  emissions  is  a 
joint effort between the City government and the 
various  stakeholders  involved  in  construction 
processes.  This  partnership  will  contribute  to 
the reduction of energy spending, mitigation and 
adaptation  to  climate  change  and  will  provide 
the City with resilient and sustainable spaces to 
live, work or enjoy.

than  half 

More 
(55%)  of  CABA’s  building 
stock  is  over  40  years  old.  Consequently,  the 
technologies  used  are  outdated  compared  to 
current energy efficiency standards. At the same 
time,  the  city  of  Buenos  Aires  has  the  highest 
gas  and  electricity  consumption  (DGyC,  2014) 
of all large cities in the country. The per capita 
consumption  indicators  for  City  residents  far 
outweigh those of the rest of the provinces.

will  allow,  inter  alia,  to  promote  and  boost 
the  construction  market 
itself  to  demand 
sustainable  buildings  by  releasing  properties’ 
energy spending.

Actions 
-  Passing  a  new  Building  Code  regulating 
sustainable building.

- Passing a new Urban Planning Code defining 
the environmental quota.

-  Promote  the  reorganization  of  the  existing 
building stock.

-  Create  a  Sustainable  Building  Certification 
System.

-  Incorporate  a  green  window  in  government 
agencies.

- Assess tax exemptions to promote sustainable 
building.

- Develop a home energy efficiency awareness 
program.

 

In  terms  of  resilience,  this  initiative  fosters 
promotion  and  incentive  strategies  for  the 
efficient  use  of  energy,  the  incorporation  of 
alternative  energies,  new  building  standards 
derived  from  the  new  Building  Code  and 
the 
residential  built 
environment in order to reduce stationary power 
production  and  consumption  and  mitigate  the 
effects of climate change in the City.

refurbishment  of 

the 

This  initiative  also  includes  the  creation  of  a 
“green  window”  to  expedite  procedures  for 
projects  that  include  sustainability  criteria  in 
their designs. It also proposes the development 
of  a  Certificate  of  Sustainable  Buildings  that 
will  include  scores  according  to  a  building 
sustainability  range  or  index.  This  certificate 

Pillar 3: Environment and sustainability

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  3.2: 
Promote the City’s energy sustainability

Turn to LED program (action in progress)
As part of its commitment to climate action and energy consumption reduction, the City pushed a program to exchange five million low 
consumption or incandescent light bulbs for LEDs for City residents. The use of this type of technology allows a 90% energy consumption 
reduction.

89

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  3.2: 
Promote the City’s energy sustainability

3.2.2

SUSTAINABILITY CHALLENGE FOR BUSINESSES

(CREAS for its acronym in Spanish). The results 
monitored in this challenge may be considered 
valid to prove the CREAS certification line linked 
to “Energy and sustainable construction”.

Actions 
-Develop an energy inventory among participating 
companies.

- Apply the carbon footprint calculation through 
the  APrA  P+L  (cleaner  production)  program  to 
participating companies.

- Incorporate best practices in energy efficiency 
among participating companies.

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
- Environmental Protection Agency (Ministry 
of Environment and Public Space - MAyEP)
- Argentine Business Association for 
Sustainable Development
- Private sector

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Security and risk managements

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Climate change
Environmental degradation
Energy insecurity

INDICATORS
- Number of companies participating in the 
challenges

from  all 

Climate  action  requires  the  commitment  and 
proactivity 
the  stakeholders  who 
inhabit  and  make  up  the  city.  The  business 
sector,  the  manufacturing  and  construction 
industries, buildings and public lighting generate 
approximately 30% of the total GHG emissions 
and are thus priority sectors with which to work 
in  order  to  promote  a  change  of  culture  and 
utilization of resources.

In  this  sense,  the  City  intends  to  promote  an 
energy efficiency challenge that involves inviting 
all companies located in the district to establish a 
ranking of eco-efficient businesses. This initiative 
is aimed at rewarding the top 3 companies that 
incorporate  energy  sustainability  practices  in 
their commercial and office buildings.

By  participating  in  this  challenge,  companies 
will collaborate in reducing energy consumption 
derived  GHG  emissions,  contribute  to  energy 
security  by  promoting 
energy 
consumption and contribute to climate action.

efficient 

In  this  way,  companies  will  tend  to  reduce 
their  consumption  expenditure  and  improve 
efficiency. They will also enhance their entry into 
new markets by providing low carbon products 
or  services  and  receive  other  benefits,  such 
as  acknowledgement  and  positioning  as  a 
sustainable company.

The initiative proposes companies that want to 
participate in this challenge to apply to begin the 
City  Office  Sustainability  Certification  process 

REFERENCE 
New  Orleans:  The  city  will  partner  with  Downtown  Development  District  to  launch  a  Downtown  Energy 
Efficiency Challenge, involving owners, businesses and employees in a one-year competition to reduce total 
energy consumption in New Orleans.

Pillar 3: Environment and sustainability

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  3.2: 
Promote the City’s energy sustainability

EFFICIENT PUBLIC BUILDINGS

to 

the  commitments  relating 

Pursuant 
to 
climate change and greenhouse gas emissions 
reduction, the city of Buenos Aires proposes an 
Efficient Public Buildings program.

The purpose of this program will be to optimize 
energy  consumption  in  public  buildings  so 
that,  by  example,  citizens  can  be  identified 
and  empowered  with  measures  promoting 
energy efficiency. Energy consumption and CO2 
emissions  are  thus  expected  to  be  reduced  in 
the City.

In line with the program, the government of the 
city of Buenos Aires is working on the relocation 
of  some  government  agencies  into  their  own 
buildings in the southern area. This relocation not 
only follows economic rationality criteria, but the 
move to modern buildings seeks to incorporate 
higher standards in the field of energy efficiency 
and sustainability.

Actions 
- Visualize the role of building mayors as engines 
of  change  and  responsible  for  the  building’s 
energy efficiency.

-  Create  a  protocol  of  energy  efficiency  and 
rational  use  of  energy  and  water  in  public 
buildings.

-  Promote  and  raise  awareness  about  waste 
reduction.

- Repurpose public buildings.

3.2.3

TIMEFRAME

Short, Medium y Long-term

STATUS
In progress with new resilient actions

STAkEHOLDERS
- Environmental Protection Agency (Ministry of 
Environment and Public Space - MAyEP)
- Ministry of Urban Development and Transport
- Education for Sustainability SPU (Ministry of 
Education and Innovation - MEIGC)

-  Develop  an  energy  and  water  consumption 
tracking board.

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES
Social and urban integration

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Climate change
Unsuitable infrastructure

INDICATORS
- Number of public buildings with energy 
efficiency protocol
- Number of buildings with sustainable 
construction or with refurbishment/
repurpose works
- kW of photovoltaic energy generated
M2 of green walls and roofs in public 
buildings

91

REFERENCE 
Athens: The city conducts energy-saving actions in its buildings to improve efficiency and reduce energy costs, as 
well as using renewable energy systems.
Glasgow:  Preparation  of  guidelines  on  climate-related  building  refurbishment  to  promote  its  adoption  by 
developers, planners and designers, focused on refurbishment to ensure its long-term operation.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  3.3: 
Implement an integrated waste management policy

3.3.1

BA4R (REDUCE, REUSE, RECYCLE AND RECOVER) 

proposals  to  boost  the  optimization  of  waste 
through reduction, recycling, reuse and recovery. 
These  actions  will  be  framed  in  a  system  of 
circular economy and civic engagement where 
recyclable materials return to productive circuits 
to become new commodities and new products. 
The development of an app with information and 
news on recycling in the City is also proposed 
so that residents can be updated and dispose of 
their waste properly.
BA4R  seeks  to  promote  a  cultural  change 
that  enhances  values  linked  to  awareness  of 
recycling  and  environmental  protection  by 
considering  that  the  shift  towards  a  circular 
economy  always  begins  through  the  adoption 
of new behaviors by each resident. In this way, 
the perspective on production and consumption 
schemes  is  understood  under  the  motto  of  a 
regenerative  and  restorative  economy  allowing 
the  generation  of  new  sources  of  employment 
thanks to the collaboration and commitment of 
all the neighbors upon separating and classifying 
waste before final disposal.

TIMEFRAME

Short, Medium y Long-term

STATUS
In progress with new resilient actions

STAkEHOLDERS
- Subsecretaría de Comunicación
- Subsecretaría de Higiene Urbana (MAyEP)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES
Social and urban integration

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Climate change
Environmental degradation

INDICATORS 
- Percentage of recycled and recovered 
material
- Percentage of landfill waste
- Number of tiles produced
- Number of app downloads

Since  2012,  the  City  has  been  working  to 
recover as much waste as possible and prevent 
landfilling in the Metropolitan area. Buenos Aires 
has  thus  developed  a  unique  management 
model  incorporating  more  than  5,324  workers 
recovering dry material on a daily basis. Waste 
pickers working in 15 Recycling Centers across 
the City, where they classify, pack and sell the 
material.
Likewise, the goal of dry material recovery the 
city proposed to achieve is 549 tons/month by 
2019. To achieve this commitment, the first dry 
waste  treatment  plant  in  the  City  was  opened 
recovering  10  tons  of  waste  per  hour  and 
treating  30%  of  all  waste  with  MRF  (Material 
Recycling Facility) technology. The MRF is part 
of  the  City  Recycling  Center,  created  to  treat 
different fractions of urban solid waste and thus 
avoid  landfilling.  The  treatment  depends  on 
the type of waste analyzed; however, the main 
objective is always to value waste to transform 
it and reintroduce it in different industries. The 
initiative, therefore, also contributes to reducing 
GHG emissions generated by waste not buried 
in landfills.
To  achieve  this  goal,  Buenos  Aires  seeks  to 
promote waste separation at source as a regular 
practice  of  all  residents.  Therefore,  different 
options  facilitate  recycling  and  promote  this 
practice  by  installing,  for  example,  more  than 
200 recycling centers where residents can take 
their recyclable material, distributed across the 
48  neighborhoods  in  Buenos  Aires,  forming  an 
ever-expanding dynamic network.
The BA4R initiative aims to deepen what Buenos 
Aires  has  already  been  doing  and  add  new 

REFERENCE 
Quito:  Program  of  mainstreaming  principles  of  circular  economy  in  production,  regulatory  and  consumer 
processes.

Pillar 3: Environment and sustainability

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  3.3: 
Implement an integrated waste management policy

Tile manufacturing with recycled materials  (action in progress)
Buenos Aires opened a new plant producing daily, by automated means, between 800 and 1000 40 × 40 cm tiles from the waste neighbors take 
to recycling centers and bins. The use of sand can be replaced by 10% with crushed glass, a material present in several recycled components. 
In tile polishing, buffing brushes need 32,000 liters of water to avoid scratching the work material. A sediment decanting pool was thus built in 
the plant, which, together with a piping and filters system treats the water used, to be constantly reutilized.

Actions 
- Develop the BARecicla app providing recycling information in the City (what can be recycled, where to recycle, when to take out the garbage 
before the waste truck round and recycling news and developments in the city).
- Strengthen the differentiated urban dry solid waste collection system.
- Promote citizen participation in waste management.
- Promote incentives for separation at source.
- Develop policies to recover universal waste (toxic - hazardous).
- Promote waste management awareness and advocacy programs.

93

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  3.3:  
Implement an integrated waste management policy

3.3.2

WASTE TO ENERGY

The  state-owned  Company 
for  Ecological 
Coordination in the Metropolitan Area (CEAMSE 
for its acronym in Spanish) announced in January 
2017, that its landfill would collapse in five years 
and could no longer receive the waste generated 
by  AMBA,  covering  40  municipalities  and  the 
City, i.e. about 15 million people producing 18,500 
tons of waste per day (by 2030 this number is 
estimated in 24,920 tons/day).

The  city  of  Buenos  Aires  has,  therefore,  began 
to  study  new  technologies  to  address  this 
challenge. Pursuant to Law 5966, amending the 
Zero  Waste  Law,  the  treatment  framework  was 
expanded to allow the transformation of waste 

in  resources,  after  maximizing  incentives  for 
recycling and reuse.

The concept of Waste to Energy is understood 
as a last resource of a circular economy virtuous 
process,  where  all  the  material  that  can  be 
recovered  was  previously  reintegrated  in  the 
production  chain.  In  the  case  of  final  disposal 
waste, the idea is to transform current garbage 
into energy.

2018

A stadium is filled every 11 days

32 stadiums per year

DAYS

2030

A stadium is filled every 8 days

44 stadiums per year

DAYS

TIMEFRAME

Medium y Long-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
Undersecretariat of Urban Heath (Ministry of 
Environment and Public Space -MAyEP)

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Climate change
Environmental degradation

INDICATORS
- Tones of thermal-treated waste
- Tons of landfill waste
- kW of energy generated

REFERENCE
This technology is widely used in Japan with 
210 plants, Germany with 99 plants, France 
with 126 plants, rest of Europe and Russia 
with 276 plants, China with 225 plants, rest 
of Asia with 62 plants and United States 
where 99 Waste to Energy (WTE) plants 
operate, annually recovering 240 million 
tons of non-recyclable waste to produce 
electricity.

Pillar 3: Environment and sustainability

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  3.3:  
Implement an integrated waste management policy

TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION IN WASTE MANAGEMENT

increasingly facilitate live operation performance 
management.  Automated 
integrated 
processes can thus be centralized, and real time 
information  flow  can  be  generated  to  facilitate 
resource planning and live operation of services.

and 

Actions 
- Set dynamic routes to collect waste from those 
containers whose sensor indicate they are full.
- Controlled disposal of waste through electronic 
devices.

To generate a more efficient service and facilitate 
waste  management,  the  City  seeks  to  bring 
innovation  into  the  various  cleaning  and  waste 
collection services by incorporating technology. 
The  use  of  technology  for  waste  management 
also allows to automate waste loading, analyze 
routes completion and keep information up-to-
date, centralized and controlled.

The City is developing a control system through 
global  positioning  devices 
to 
generate specific and immediate georeferenced 
information reports.

in  vehicles 

Furthermore,  the  operation  of  almost  28,000 
wet  waste  containers  and  around  3,000  dry 
or  recyclable  waste  bins  would  be  monitored 
through tag reading sensors. This will generate 
information  on  its  operation,  verifying  clearing 
and sanitation. A data transmission system will 
also be implemented in an indication area in the 
City to identify who is using the container and 
control waste disposal.

This  initiative  is  being  integrated  with  other 
data-based  decision-making  systems,  which 

3.3.3

TIMEFRAME

Long-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
Undersecretariat of Urban Health (Ministry of 
Environment and Public Space -MAyEP)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES
Social and urban integration

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

Pneumatic collection system at the Innovation Park 
The  Innovation  Park  will  include  a  pneumatic  waste  collection  system  granting  a  more 
efficient service with less environmental damage.

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Climate change 
Environmental degradation

INDICATORS
- Number of containers with sensors
- Number of dynamic routes added

95

PILLAR 4

Social and
Urban Integration

An integrated city, without barriers and on a human 
scale, that grows in a sustainable and balanced way.

4.1 IMPROVE ACCESS TO QUALITY HOUSING FOR ALL CITY RESIDENTS

NO POVERTY

CLEAN WATER AND 
SANITATION

SUSTAINABLE 
CITIES AND 
COMMUNITIES

4.2 PROMOTE SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY AND A METROPOLITAN CROSS-MODAL SYSTEM

AFFORDABLE AND 
CLEAN ENERGY

INDUSTRY, 
INNOVATION AND 
INFRASTRUCTURE

SUSTAINABLE 
CITIES AND 
COMMUNITIES

4.3 DESIGN A PEOPLE-ORIENTED CITY WHICH PROMOTES COEXISTENCE AND ENJOYMENT

INDUSTRY, 
INNOVATION AND 
INFRASTRUCTURE

SUSTAINABLE 
CITIES AND 
COMMUNITIES

CLIMATE 
ACTION

97

“Thinking  of  a  resilient  Buenos  Aires  entails 
integrating  the  neighborhoods  to  the  city  and  the 
city  to  the  neighborhoods,  promoting  interaction 
among  neighbors,  facilitating  mobility  among  and 
within  neighborhoods,  and  generating  options  for 
enjoyment  and  coexistence  in  all  the  areas  of  the 
City.”

Current Situation

Social and urban integration of all the neighborhoods of the city of Buenos Aires is one of the main bases to build urban resilience and is 
inherent to the vision of the city that we want.

The population of the city of Buenos Aires remains stable since 1947, with around 3 million inhabitants, but its demographic structure and its 
housing stock have greatly changed since then. The city still faces the challenge of narrowing the gap in the access to housing and reaching 
a harmonious development of and among all its neighborhoods. Today, the City has the vision to boost its population growth in the next 
decades through a new planning, using a new urban planning code which promotes mixed uses, a balanced and harmonious development, 
and includes informal settlements as part of the City’s urban fabric. 

This new City concept goes together with initiatives that seek to facilitate access to housing.  Thinking of and building an integrated city 
also entails improving the conditions to access the rental market. The number of tenants in the City represents 30% of total households 
and, with the growing demand, the market has increasingly been generating more requirements for tenants. However, various mechanisms 
that protect tenants and increase the offer of available housing, and that, in turn, facilitate access to this market, are being promoted by 
different areas of government. Such mechanisms are included in this document. Improvement of access to housing also entails integrating 
low-income neighborhoods to dynamics of the City. These neighborhoods have grown steadily since the 1980s and their population amounts 
to almost 7.6% of the total population (DGEyC, 2017), that is, around 200,000 people.

In addition, the City has experienced multiple interventions and plans that today pose challenges to urban development conceived on a 
human scale. The development of the port area with industrial equipment and of the railway and highway systems are some examples of 
infrastructure that today are planned to be reconverted and adapted to eliminate urban barriers and, thus, generating an integrated city, 
both at the urban and the social levels. 

Within the context of this strategy, the dialogue between the city and its metropolitan area refers to the development of an integrated city. 
In this regard, resilience entails giving priority to the use of public transport and walkability, by discouraging the use of car vehicles and 
consolidating the metropolitan cross-modal system. The impact of these types of practices results in positive effects on traffic congestion 
in urban highways and in the downtown and greater downtown areas of the City, as well as in the reduction of commute times.

Ultimately, building an integrated city requires policies and initiatives that consider issues beyond infrastructure. Thinking of a resilient 
Buenos Aires entails integrating the neighborhoods to the city and the city to the neighborhoods, promoting interaction among neighbors, 
facilitating  mobility  among  and  within  neighborhoods,  and  generating  options  for  enjoyment  and  coexistence  in  all  the  areas  of  the 
City. An integrated Buenos Aires aims at improving access to quality housing for all residents, promoting the integration of low-income 
neighborhoods, thinking of a people-oriented city and growing in an orderly, balanced and resilient way.

99

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.1: 
Improve access to quality housing for all City residents

4.1.1

SOCIAL AND URBAN INTEGRATION OF LOW-INCOME NEIGHBORHOODS

TIMEFRAME

Medium y Long-term

STATUS
In progress

STAkEHOLDERS
- City Housing Institute (Office of the Chief 
of Staff - JGM)
- Secretariat of Social and Urban Integration 
(Office of the Chief of Staff - JGM)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Innovation, talent and opportunities

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Informal settlements

INDICATORS
- Number of improved housing
- Number of linear meters of improved 
infrastructure
- Number of housing built for the integration 
of neighborhoods
- Percentage of people living in informal 
settlements
- Number of people in low-income 
neighborhoods with access to basic utilities

Pillar 4: Social and urban integration

low-income  neighborhoods  of 

In  2016,  the  City  engaged  in  one  of  the  most 
ambitious plans of urban and social integration 
of low-income neighborhoods in its entire history 
with  the  purpose  of  providing  access  to  basic 
services to at least 80,000 people in 2019.  Near 
7.2% of the City population (DGEyC, 2017) resides 
in  informal  housing  and  have  irregular  access 
to  essential  utilities,  in  the  more  than  20  low-
income neighborhoods existing in Buenos Aires.
The  City  is  working  intensely  in  two  of  the 
largest 
the 
district: Barrio 31 (Neighborhood 31) and Barrio 
20 (Neighborhood 20). In these neighborhoods, 
interventions  are  being  carried  out  on  an 
unprecedented scale. Other neighborhoods are 
also  included  in  this  agenda:  Lamadrid,  Fraga, 
Rodrigo Bueno, Ramón Carrillo and 1-11-14.
The objective of the urban integration plan is to 
build new housing, improve the existing ones and 
develop  infrastructure  so  that  the  people  who 
live in low-income neighborhoods have the same 
quality services as all other neighbors. Moreover, 
the new housing will include sustainable design 
principles  which  will  contribute  to  mitigate  the 
effects  of  climate  change,  something  which 
accounts 
the  cross-cutting  approach 
offered  by  resilience.  In  turn,  with  the  purpose 
of simplifying and reducing maintenance costs 
and  promoting  social  integration  and  cohesion 
among  the  residents  of  the  neighborhoods, 
workshops are organized before, during and after 
relocation  to  new  housing.  These  workshops 
promote  neighbor  organizational  actions  for 
matters  relating  to  housing  administration  and 
maintenance.  Such  practices  indicate  a  social 
and  urban  integration  process  focused  on  the 
neighbors,  the  sustainable  development  of  the 

for 

to 

include 

neighborhoods and the long-term vision of these 
initiatives.
Based on lessons learnt from past experiences, 
the integration processes incorporate inclusive 
components,  among  which  we  can  point  out 
the  creation  of  participatory  management 
working  groups  designed 
the 
neighbors  in  the  transformation  processes  of 
their  neighborhoods.  This  way,  the  neighbors’ 
perspectives are included throughout the entire 
design  and  implementation  process  of  the 
integration  initiatives,  generating  an  ongoing 
dialogue  between  neighbors  and  government 
officials to design the City we want. Participation 
in  the  design  of  their  future  housing  is  a  key 
element  to  promote  people’s  ownership  and 
care  of  these  new  urban  fragments  still  under 
construction  and 
is  crucial  to  meet  their 
sustainability.
The  integration  of  low-income  neighborhoods 
also  entails  boosting  education  and  health.  In 
this regard, the City will build new educational 
institutions, and this will extend the network of 
primary  healthcare  centers  and  will  generate 
mechanisms  that  will  promote  employability 
and  the  formalization  of  residents’  jobs.  This 
will  allow  fostering  their  economic  and  social 
development. The proximity to different facilities 
seeks to reduce access gaps and generate the 
necessary  conditions  for  all  residents  to  have 
the  same  development  opportunities.  Building 
a resilient city involves working to further social 
inclusion  and  the  participative  nature  of  social 
and  urban  integration  processes,  to  transform 
them in another part of the City, where neighbors 
can live, work and enjoy.

REFERENCE 
Medellín: Medellin City Hall incorporated tools of social urban planning to geographically include informal 
settlements which were previously isolated, through the construction of the Metrocable cable car and the 
construction of cultural facilities such as the Santo Domingo Library.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.1: 
Improve access to quality housing for all City residents

ACTIONS IN PROGRESS

“María Elena Walsh” Educational Center
For the City to advance, it is essential that all residents have the same opportunities to grow, develop and live better. That is why 
the City has started a process to improve and integrate Barrio 31. Such process includes the creation of the “María Elena Walsh” 
Educational Center, where also the Ministry of Education will have offices. This Educational Center will feature a kindergarten, a 
primary school and an educational center for adults.
After the construction of the Educational Center and the new administrative offices of the Ministry of Education, it is estimated that 
2,300 people will enter Barrio 31 daily, and this will foster its economic development. To that end, there has been a binding call for 
a preliminary design project to obtain the best architectural and economic proposal.

New Housing at Barrio 31
Within the framework of the urban integration works, 1,042 new housing units are being built to relocate the families that are 
currently living in the space under the Illia highway, a space which will be released and transformed into a line park. In addition, 
the City built 110 new housing units for those families, as well as activities located in the area where the new Illia Highway will by-
pass the Barrio 31. 
The works are supplemented with a resettlement process that includes participative work with the families, who are also assisted 
by teams of social workers. 
The houses are built in steel frame, with state-of-the-art technology which allows the residents to enjoy sustainable and quality 
housing. The new units, in addition, have photovoltaic panels and solar water heaters, a milestone in the use of renewable energies 
for the city of Buenos Aires. The neighbors will have cold and hot water even if there is a power outage.

Participative work in the design of the “Pope Francis” Housing Complex – Barrio 20 
The main objective of the Barrio 20 integration project is to promote access to decent housing to 9,119 families and integrate the 
neighborhood to the city. The integration project involves the construction of 1,702 new housing units in the future “Pope Francis” 
Neighborhood, improvement of the existing housing, provision of basic utility services, opening of streets and installation of urban 
facilities. In addition, the integration project of the Barrio 20 is implemented under a participative scheme. To that end, participative 
working groups were created, formed by representatives of the City Housing Institute (IVC, for its acronym in Spanish), representatives 
of  other  areas  of  government  or  the  concession  companies,  representatives  from  the  Junta  Vecinal  (Neighborhood  Committee), 
neighborhood leaders, delegates, neighbors and other organizations involved in different neighborhood activities. Each instance (design, 
implementation and follow-up of works) of the integration process is decided by consensus with the neighbors in these working groups..

Center for Entrepreneurial and Labor Development (CeDEL, for its acronym in Spanish)
CeDEL is a government office building located within Barrio 31, created to help drive the economic development of neighbors. It 
offers trades training, customized advice to entrepreneurs and a job bank which, through the Employment Integration Program, 
offers more opportunities to find formal employment.
More than 7,000 neighbors have visited CeDEL looking for different opportunities to develop their economies, either through 
training in courses or workshops, registration at the job bank or seeking advice for their entrepreneurial projects. 10% of the 
Economically Active Population (EAP) of Barrio 31 has received training and the Job Bank has 3,680 registered individuals, out of 
which 250 are already working in the formal economy.

Inter-American Development Bank new building 
The new building of the Inter-American Development Bank in the Barrio 31 will create more than 1,000 jobs during its construction 
phase. After construction, more than 500 people will go in the neighborhood to work. The building will feature two main uses: the 
offices of the IDB and a pedestrian bridge for the City neighbors.
The structure will have three supporting points and will serve as a bridge to connect Barrio 31 with the Thays Park, from the 
Convention and Exhibition Center, and the School of Law station of the subway H line. The pedestrian accesses, at both sides 
of the building will have escalators and elevators. The bridge will have a green cover, generating 6,000 square meters of green 
spaces and will save around an hour of travel time to the neighborhood residents.

Barrio 31 New Commercial Center
The City is working to boost the commercial center in Barrio 31. Firstly, work was done to improve the infrastructure and new booths 
were installed for the exhibitors of the Feria Latina (Latin Fair), one of the main points of economic activity for the neighbors. Secondly, 
the City will create a new commercial market, the Mercado de Retiro (Retiro Market), which will offer gastronomy and producers’ 
products, and will attract neighbors from around city. Finally, the Paseo Comercial (Commercial Promenade), the street with the 
greatest economic activity in Barrio 31, will be revamped. This revamping entails improving the external parts of the housing units 
and making interventions in the stores to improve their structures, security and hygiene conditions. Also, economic activity will be 
fostered, and jobs formalization will be promoted with the assistance of CeDEL.

101

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.1: 
Improve access to quality housing for all City residents

4.1.2

ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE HOUSING

TIMEFRAME

Medium y Long-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
- Banco Ciudad
- City Housing Institute (Office of the Chief 
of Staff - JGM)
- Execution of Special Works – Special 
Projects Unit (UPE in Spanish) (Ministry of 
Urban Development and Transport -MDUyT)
- Youth Olympic Games UPE (Office of the 
Deputy Chief of Government -VJG)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Diversity, gender and coexistence

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Lack of affordable housing

INDICATORS
- Number of loans given by the First Home 
Program
- Number of loans given to develop 
affordable housing
- Percentage of new housing requested in 
the construction permits as per category
 

Pillar 4: Social and urban integration

To create resilience, the City constantly develops 
resourceful  and  inclusive  policies  to  generate 
new  mechanisms  that  help  bridge  the  gap 
between  housing  supply  and  demand.  In  this 
regard, it works to activate the housing sale and 
rental  markets,  with  the  objective  of  reducing 
access  barriers  and  expanding  the  existing 
supply.
In the rental market, the City will seek to tackle 
the main institutional barriers existing to housing 
access. In addition, the current situation of the 
City’s vacant housing will be analyzed to develop 
future  lines  of  action  that  assist  in  promoting 
market  activation.  These  actions  result  from  a 
working group made up by the main civil society 
organizations, the real estate chambers and real 
estate developers.
The initiative seeks to generate tax exemptions 
and  loan  incentives  to  expand  housing  supply, 
particularly  in  the  southern  area  of  the  City. 
Additionally,  urban  planning  contributions 
will  be  implemented  in  new  developments  in 
already  consolidated  areas  with  the  purpose 

of expanding the supply of affordable housing. 
Finally,  the  City  will  promote  soft  loan  lines  to 
facilitate residents’ access to their first dwelling.

Actions
-  Reduce  barriers  to  access  the  rental  market: 
promote  alternatives  to  the  requirement  of  a 
home  owner  guarantor,  offer  free-of-charge 
signature  certifications  and  publish  sample 
rental agreements. 
- Study the current situation of vacant housing 
in the City and promote actions for such vacant 
housing to reenter the market.
-  Offer  tax  exemptions  and  loans  to  develop 
affordable housing.
-  Perform  urban  planning  contributions  in  new 
real  estate  developments 
in  consolidated 
neighborhoods.
- Offer soft loans to promote access to the first 
dwelling.

Primera  Casa  BA  (BA  First  Home 
Loans)  (action in progress)
The City re-launched the Primera Casa BA (BA 
First Home) program, whereby loans are given 
to promote access to the first house to middle-
class,  the  youth  and  women  sectors.  In  this 
regard, in addition to modifying the credit line 
called Primera Casa UVA (First Home adjusted 
by the local reference unit called “UVA”), the City 
will add two new credit lines: Primera Casa Mujer 
(First  Home  Women)  and  Primera  Casa  Joven 
(First  Home  Youth).  These  credit  lines,  which 
aim to speed up and reduce requirements and 
facilitate  financing,  are  directed  at  promoting 
gender equality and the access of young people 
to their own housing and, in turn, fostering the 
development of the City´s southern area.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.1: 
Improve access to quality housing for all City residents

The  legacy  of  the  Olympic  Village:  1,050 
affordable housing (action in progress)
One  of  the  major  legacies  left  by  the  Youth  Olympic 
Games hosted by the City in 2018 is the reconversion of 
the 1,050 housing units of the Olympic Village, created to 
accommodate the athletes, into a permanent residential 
neighborhood. After the event, the apartments will be 
refurbished and by mid-2019 will start being transferred 
to  City  neighbors.  In  order  to  have  access  to  these 
apartments, a loan system with the lowest interest rate 
in  the  market  and  installments  similar  to  a  rent  was 
launched.  The  neighbors  of  the  southern  area  of  the 
City,  Police  employees  and  teachers  of  the  City  have 
priority to obtain access to these units. The loan system 
targets middle class individuals with both, formal and 
informal income.

103

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.2: 
Promote sustainable mobility and a metropolitan cross-modal system 

4.2.1

INTEGRATED PUBLIC TRANSPORT

One  of  the  main  challenges  faced  by  the  city 
of  Buenos  Aires  is  vehicle  congestion,  which 
produces impacts on the environment and travel 
time of those residing in or moving around the 
City. Buenos Aires is working on improving the 
supply and quality of public transport so that all 
residents who move around the city can do so in 
a more rapid, safe and sustainable way.

The City has created a Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) 
system, 
locally  known  as  Metrobus,  which 
combines buses with dedicated bus lanes and 
allows  for  efficient  and  comfortable  transport 
networks.  The  system  features  near  62.5  km 
in the city of Buenos Aires and it is planned to 
reach  near  80  km  to  benefit  around  2  million 
users who will save between 30% and 50% travel 
time daily.

to 

improve 

The  City  has  committed 
the 
frequency and quality of transport in the subway 
system.  This  challenge  involved  improving  the 
infrastructure  and  rolling  stock  to  reduce  the 
average time between one subway and the other 
during  rush  hours  to  three  minutes.    This  has 
benefited  70%  of  the  passengers.  In  addition, 
work will be carried out to make subway stations 
more accessible to all City residents.

To  generate  an  integrated  transport  system, 
the  City  will  work,  together  with  the  national 
government,  in  the  construction  of  a  Regional 
Express  Network  (RER,  for  its  acronym  in 
Spanish)  to  combine  the  metropolitan  railways 
into a single transport network. The network will 

connect  the  railways  which  arrive  into  the  City 
from  the  North,  South  and  West,  and  this  will 
generate a great node of regional connectivity. 
This  entails  the  construction  of  near  16  km  of 
new  tunnels  which  will  connect  the  more  than 
800 that already exist in the Metropolitan Region 
Railway System and will bring the network back 
to the level of excellence it historically used to 
have. In turn, it will allow passengers to connect 
with the subway, the Metrobus and the bicycle 
public  transport  system.  With  the  RER,  the 
number of railway passengers will be tripled to 
5.1 million per day.

Actions
- Build the Regional Express Network.

- Expand the bikeways network and add new sta-
tions to the bicycle public transport system.

- Improve the infrastructure and add new techno-
logy to the subway network.

- Improve accessibility to subway stations.

- Expand the BRT (Metrobus) Network

- Reduce urban barriers by building underground 
level crossings, opening of streets and ground le-
vel crossings in the metropolitan railways.

- Promote the use of metropolitan railways for ur-
ban use.

TIMEFRAME

Long-term

STATUS
In progress with new resilient actions

STAkEHOLDERS
- Ferrocarriles Argentinos S.E. (State-owned 
railway company - National Government)
- National Ministry of Transport
- Secretariat of Transport (Ministry of Urban 
Development and Transport -MDUyT)
- Subterráneos de Buenos Aires S.E. (State-
owned subway company) (Ministry of Urban 
Development and Transport -MDUyT)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Vehicle congestion
Climate change 
Poor air quality

Pillar 4: Social and urban integration

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.2: 
Promote sustainable mobility and a metropolitan cross-modal system 

Actions 
-  Interventions  for  the  installation  of  filling 
stations.
- Start-up of the pilot project in 4 bus lines

ELECTRIC MOBILITY

Within the framework of the Clean Mobility Plan 
2035, the city of Buenos Aires and the national 
government  will  jointly  implement  a  pilot  test 
with  four  bus  lines  (12,  34,  39  and  59)  in  early 
2019,  to  evaluate  the  technical  viability  of  this 
new form of mobility, as well as its operational, 
economic  and  environmental  feasibility.  There 
will be a total of eight buses, two per line, with 
different cargo and supplier technologies, which 
will be tested for one year in the city’s traffic.

The  results,  which  will  be  evaluated  together 
with CAF, will be a key tool for the adoption of 
a larger scale plan in the Metropolitan Area of 
Buenos Aires, which has one of the largest fleets 
in  the  region,  with18,000  buses.  It  is  important 
to highlight that the initiative is directed both at 
the use of electric transport and the creation of 
adequate infrastructure to promote the demand 
generation of this type of transport.

The incorporation of electric transport seeks also 
to  reduce  GHG  emissions  and  contaminating 
gases  (CO2,  NOx  y  MP)  generated  by  vehicles 
powered by fossil fuels, such as diesel, gasoline 
or CNG.

4.2.2

TIMEFRAME

Medium/Long-term

STATUS
Pilot project

STAkEHOLDERS
- Environmental Protection Agency (Ministry of 
Environment and Public Space -MAyEP)
- Transport companies
- National Ministry of Transport
- Secretariat of Transport (Ministry of Urban 
Development and Transport - MDUyT)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Climate change 
Poor air quality

INDICATORS
- Number of electric buses in the City.
- Number of filling stations.
- Percentage of GHG emissions reductions.

105

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.2: 
Promote sustainable mobility and a metropolitan cross-modal system 

4.2.3

BA CARPOOL

Actions
- Generate new regulatory frameworks for the de-
velopment of these services.

- Provide regulated or designated parking areas.

- Evaluate the information and data requirements 
to ensure vehicle control needs.

New ways of mobility are emerging in other cities 
of  the  world  because  of  mobile  applications 
and  the  dynamism  of  new  digital  economies, 
based  on  collaboration  and  crowdsourcing.  It 
is  important  that  the  City  evaluates  different 
alternatives that allow for a sustainable transport 
model.

Among these new ways of mobility there is one 
that stands out: the use of shared motor vehicles 
that allow renting a car for a limited period. This 
mobility  helps  reduce  not  only  the  number  of 
private vehicles in the cities, but also the need 
to have parking areas, since it helps free space 
in the city that can be used for other purposes. 

TIMEFRAME

Long-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
Secretariat of Transport (Ministry of Urban 
Development and Transport - MDUyT)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

Innovation, talent and opportunities

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Vehicle congestion
Climate change
Poor air quality

Pillar 4: Social and urban integration

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.2: 
Promote sustainable mobility and a metropolitan cross-modal system 

BA EN BICI (BA BY BIKE)

are  in  strategic  locations  in  the  City  so  that  an 
increasing number of neighbors can have access 
to bicycles as a means of public transport. The 
Ecobici system has 290,000 registered users. It 
has a record of 9,500 trips daily and more than 8 
million trips since its creation. .

Actions 
- Expand the public bicycle and stations system.
- Extend the bikeways network to AMBA.
- Add new bicycles to the Ecobici system.
-  Include  public  bicycle  lockers  at  the  main 
transfer centers.
- Give courses on basic mechanical concepts for 
bicycle users.
- Install bicycle racks in public buildings, hospitals, 
education institutions, banks and cultural centers.
- Evaluate access to the public transport system 
in non-business days and during non-rush hours.
-  Develop  an  App  to  gain  rewards  points  per 
kilometer  ridden  by  bike  to  be  exchanged  for 
cultural vouchers. 

Through  the  Sustainable  Mobility  Plan,  the  City 
gives  priority  to  public  transport  and  active 
mobility means, such as cycling and walking. The 
use of bicycles, apart from having multiple health 
benefits, does not pollute and is an inexpensive 
means  of 
reduces  vehicle 
congestion.

transport 

that 

Although almost half of the City households have 
at  least  one  bicycle,  only  2%  of  the  residents 
use bikes as the only means of transport, while 
another  4%  use  bicycles  supplemented  by 
another means of transport.

With  the  purpose  of  promoting  the  use  of 
bicycles,  the  protected  bikeways  network  was 
created in 2009, which today runs along 206 km 
and will extend to around 250 km in 2019.  The 
network is specially designed to ensure cyclists a 
safer and more rapid mobility system, separated 
from  the  rest  of  the  roadway,  and  to  integrate 
strategic  points  of  the  City  such  as  transfer 
centers, universities, schools and hospitals

In addition, the City has created a Bicycle Public 
Transport  System  (Ecobici)  free  of  charge.  The 
system  has  2,500  bicycles  and  200  automated 
stations  operating  24/7.  The  Ecobici  system 
is  planned  to  expand  to  4,000  bicycles  and 
400  stations  in  the  near  future.  The  stations 

4.2.4

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
In progress with new resilient actions

STAkEHOLDERS
- Undersecretariat of Sustainable and Safe 
Mobility (Ministry of Urban Development and 
Transport -MDUyT) 

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Vehicle congestion
Climate change

INDICATORS
- Percentage of trips made by bicycle daily
- Number of users registered in the Ecobici 
system
- Number of daily trips in the Bicycle Public 
- Transport System
- Number of Ecobici stations
- Number of bicycles in the Ecobici system
- Number of km of bikeways
- Number of basic mechanical centers

107

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.3: 
Design a people-oriented city which promotes coexistence and enjoyment 

4.3.1

DEVELOPMENT OF PEDESTRIAN PRIORITY ZONES AND VEHICLE 
RESTRICTION IN THE DOWNTOWN AREA 

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
In progress

STAkEHOLDERS
- Ministry of Environment and Public Spaces 
- Ministry of Urban Development and 
Transport

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Vehicle congestion
Climate change
Air quality 

INDICATORS
- Number of environmental areas

Pillar 4: Social and urban integration

sustainability, 

The City is working to create a city on a human 
scale and has committed to build new pedestrian 
priority  zones.  These  areas  aim  to  promote 
walkability, 
enhancement  of 
heritage value and revitalization of public spaces 
through  a  comprehensive  approach  which  will 
strengthen the identity of the neighborhoods.
This will result in the regeneration of urban spaces, 
revitalizing  the  neighborhoods  and  reactivating 
the local economies. In turn, the pedestrianization 
responds  to  the  principles  which  establish 
macroblocks as Basic Sustainability Units and is 
in  line  with  the  city  vision  contemplated  in  the 
New Building Code and the New Urban Planning 
Code. 
In  addition,  the  City  is  promoting  car  vehicle 
restriction  to  reduce  traffic  congestion  in  the 
downtown area during rush hours. This restriction 
will gradually increase to restrict vehicle access 
during working hours and promote the expansion 
of pedestrian zones.
This seeks to discourage the use of automobiles 
and transform places that were previously used 

for  vehicle  circulation  into  coexistence  spaces 
or areas for the exclusive use of pedestrians and 
bicycles  -  something  which  will  also  contribute 
to  protect  the  environment  and  work  for  the 
commitment to become Carbon Neutral by 2050.
 
Actions
-  Develop  new  environmental  areas  in  the 
following locations:
 
 
 
 
 
 
-  Increase  vehicle  restriction  in  the  downtown 
area.

- Historic City Center
- Retiro
- Tribunales
- Once
- Microcentro
- Retiro

Pedestrianization of “Tribunales”   
(action in progress)

Pedestrian areas, such as the ones already implemented in the “Tribunales” Area, contribute to 
enhance environmental sustainability, enrich the quality of life of the neighbors, improve road 
safety and promote good coexistence in public spaces to create a City on a human scale.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.3: 
Design a people-oriented city which promotes coexistence and enjoyment 

LAST MILE LOGISTICS

As  new  pedestrian  priority  areas  and  vehicle 
restriction  to  reduce  traffic  congestion  during 
rush  hours  in  the  downtown  area  grow,  new 
challenges  are  posed  to  supply  logistics  for 
stores  and  companies  located  in  those  areas. 
This  logistics  is  a  highly  customized  service, 
with complex routes and multiple stakeholders 
involved.  The  trend  shows  that  with  digital 
advances  the  need  to  distribute  goods  will 
progressively  increase,  and  consequently  the 
urban logistics traffic would tend to increase.

The vision of a City on a human scale demands 
offering  greater  order  to  the  urban  logistics 
activity, contemplating both the needs of shop 
owners  as  well  as  those  of  vehicles.  The  City 
is  planning  a  comprehensive  reorganization 
of  loading  and  unloading  operations,  aimed  at 
preventing vehicles from parking in unauthorized 

lanes and seeking the optimization of operation 
time. To that end, the creation of new exclusive 
loading  and  unloading  “blue”  spots  is  being 
evaluated,  as  well  as  the  generation  of  new 
cargo splitting points.

Actions
- Promote incentives to electric cars and active 
mobility in the downtown area for logistics.

- Install urban fixtures for logistics by bicycle (car-
go and electric).

Electric mobility for “last mile” logistics (action in progress)
Some  logistics  companies  are  incorporating  100%  electric  vehicles  to  their  physical 
distribution fleet. Such vehicles have 200 actual kilometers autonomy under normal use 
conditions and they reach a maximum speed of 130 km/hour. They are designed to reduce 
the environmental impact through a new noiseless, emission-free way of distributing goods, 
in densely populated and traffic congested regions.

4.3.2

TIMEFRAME

Long-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
- Secretariat of Transport (Ministry of Urban 
Development and Transport -MDUyT)
-Private sector

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

Innovation, talent and opportunities

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Vehicle congestion
Climate change
Air quality

109

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.3: 
Design a people-oriented city which promotes coexistence and enjoyment 

4.3.3

BARRIO 31 HIGH LINE PARK

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
In progress 

STAkEHOLDERS
- Autopista Urbana S.A. (Ministry of Urban 
Development and Transport -MDUyT)
- Ministry of Environment and Public Spaces 
- Secretariat of Social and Urban Integration 
(Office of the Chief of Staff -JGM)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

Diversity, gender and coexistence

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Informal settlements
Vehicle congestion
Urban degradation
Environmental degradation
Lack of social cohesion

INDICATORS
- Square meters of new green spaces
- Number of households relocated to 
permanent dwellings

Pillar 4: Social and urban integration

Within the framework of the urban transformation 
that  the  City  is  carrying  out  in  Barrio  31 
(Neighborhood 31), a reconversion process of the 
highway infrastructure that runs across this low-
income  neighborhood  is  underway.  The  current 
location of the Illia Highway represents a physical 
barrier  that  divides  the  neighborhood  in  two, 
something  which  makes  its  integration  difficult. 
The  City  has  committed  to  modify  the  highway 
layout and is building a new rapid way that will 
bypass Barrio 31.

This  new  layout  will  promote  interconnectivity 
and  integration  of  the  urban  fabric  among 
Barrio 31 and Barrio 31 bis, the port area and the 
Autonomous  City  of  Buenos  Aires.  In  turn,  the 
circulation of the 5,900 cars that enter the city of 
Buenos Aires every day through that highway will 
improve, since it will feature three different exits 
that  will  help  control  the  flow  of  vehicles  going 
into the city. It will be a highway that will circulate 
between Barrio 31 and Libertador Avenue.

This initiative will allow for the revamping of the 
Illia Highway, since it will reconvert it from being 
an urban expressway into a High Line Park and 
will provide the City with a new green area. The 
construction  of  the  High  Line  Park  will  improve 
the  environmental  conditions  of  the  City  of 
Buenos Aires and will generate a 343% increase 
in the public space per inhabitant in Barrio 31. The 
design proposal is the result of an International 
Competition and its bases were defined through 
citizen participation of neighborhood residents.

The High Line Park and the new Illia Highway are 
projects that aim to develop the highway in full 
harmony with its surrounding urban areas, which 
will generate environmental conditions favorable 
to  the  development  of  civic  life  and  its  socio-
environmental viability and will contribute to the 
urban development of the city and its interaction 
with the port areas and the riverfront.

REFERENCE
New York: The High Line park is an elevated greenway park created on an old railroad with an extension of 
2.33 km in New York. 

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.3: 
Design a people-oriented city which promotes coexistence and enjoyment 

COMMUNE 8 ON A HUMAN SCALE

Commune 8 is one of the 15 districts of the city 
of  Buenos  Aires,  made  up  by  the  Villa  Lugano, 
Villa Soldati and Villa Riachuelo neighborhoods. 
These neighborhoods were incorporated to the 
layout of the urban sprawl at very late stages and, 
due to the significant amount of available land in 
this area, they were a preferential location in the 
City  for  the  construction  of  large  facilities,  the 
installation of big factories and the construction 
of social housing. These interventions resulted in 
a fragmented territory for vehicles.

Within  the  framework  of  the  integration  of  the 
South of the City, a Master Plan was outlined for 
Commune 8. This Plan highlights the opening of 
new streets around the big premises to reduce 
urban barriers, promote mixed uses and revamp 
its green spaces. Today, Commune 8 is host to 
profound urban transformations because of the 
social urban integration projects in Barrio 20 and 
the creation of the Olympic Village (one of the 
most  significant  legacies  of  the  Buenos  Aires 
2018 Youth Olympic Games).

To  create  a  Commune  on  a  human  scale, 
the  Resilience  Strategy  proposes  to  boost 
interventions that help turn these fragments of 
the  city  into  spaces  which  promote  walkability 
and enjoyment. In this case, building resilience 
entails  promoting  the  articulation  between 
current  and  past  urban  planning  interventions, 
also evaluating the City’s future challenges.

Actions
- Continue with the implementation of Commune 
8 Master Plan.

- Drive the urban development of the districts’ 
margins  and  integrate  the  motor  race  track  to 
the neighborhood.

- Promote the Cargo Transfer Center.

- Open new streets.

- Promote mixed uses and new residential spaces.

- Reconvert the Olympic Village into a permanent 
neighborhood for 1,200 families.

-  Reconvert  the  Olympic  Park  into  the  new 
National High-Performance Sport Center.

4.3.4

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
In progress with new resilient actions

STAkEHOLDERS
- City Housing Institute (Office of the Chief 
of Staff - JGM)
- Ministry of Environment and Public Spaces 
- Ministry of Urban Development and 
Transport

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

Innovation, talent and opportunities

- Develop infrastructure for sustainable mobility.

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

- Improve urban outdoor furniture.

- Increase the number of urban trees and revitalize 
walkways.

- Revamp the Indo-American Park and the City 
Park. 

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Social breakdown
Urban decay

111

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.3: 
Design a people-oriented city which promotes coexistence and enjoyment 

4.3.5

REFORM OF THE URBAN PLANNING AND BUILDING CODES

The City foresees that the population will grow 
to reach 5 million inhabitants by 2050. For this 
growth  to  be  adequate  and  sustainable,  the 
urban planning and building codes are currently 
being redefined.
The  proposed  New  Urban  Planning  Code  and 
the New Building Code have been discussed in a 
participative manner through different neighbor 
forums,  meetings  at  professional  organizations 
and  institutional  contributions  from  universities 
and think tanks.
The  main  aspects  of  the  proposed  reform 
are  updating  the  regulations  and  making  a 
substantive change in the way in which growth 
and densification of the current housing stock 
are  managed.  The  New  Urban  Planning  Code 
leaves aside land use based on zoning and gives 
priority to the homogenization of the buildings 
and  the  intention  of  promoting  mixed  uses  in 
the urban space. In this regard, higher buildings 
are  sought  but  safeguarding  sustainability 
criteria,  promoting  the  reconstruction  of  the 
center of the blocks and the reconstruction of 
the  continuous  building  line.  In  addition,  the 
proposed  reform  establishes  the  principles 
of  social  habitat  which  seek  the  integration 
of  informal  settlements  and  water  prevention 

areas to incorporate mitigation mechanisms for 
heavy storms.
Regarding the New Building Code, this includes 
matters  related  to  sustainable  design  and 
promotes  energy  efficiency  standards  through 
the regulation of the use of new technologies, the 
quality of materials and the installation systems. 
It also eliminates the obligation to make certain 
differentiations, such as restrooms differentiated 
by sex, with the aim of incorporating a gender 
perspective.  This  reform  promotes  simpler 
and  more  agile  proceedings.  It  also  entails  a 
paradigm shift which will enable regular updates 
to meet current and future needs.
The  vision  underlying  the  new  codes  is  the 
construction  of  an  integrated  city  which  offers 
the  same  opportunities  both  north  and  south 
of  the  City,  protects  our  heritage,  promotes 
a  more  sustainable  city  and  generates 
instruments  to  adapt  to  and  mitigate  the 
effects  of  climate  change.  In  this  manner,  the 
identity  of  neighborhoods  will  be  preserved, 
the  development  of  neglected  areas  will  be 
driven, and a greater population density will be 
promoted. 

TIMEFRAME

Long, medium and short terms

STATUS
In progress with new resilient actions

STAkEHOLDERS
- Environmental Protection Agency (Ministry 
of Environment and Public Space - MAyEP)
- City Housing Institute (Office of the Chief 
of Staff - JGM)
- Undersecretariat of Urban Planning 
(Ministry of Urban Development and 
Transport MDUyT)
- Undersecretariat of Registry, Interpretation 
and Cadaster (Ministry of Urban 
Development and Transport)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

Diversity, gender and coexistence

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Urban decay
Population loss
Uncontrolled urban growth
Floods
Intense storms
Heat waves
Environmental degradation
Biodiversity loss

Pillar 4: Social and urban integration

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.3: 
Design a people-oriented city which promotes coexistence and enjoyment 

With the update of the Urban Planning Code, the City is creating new tools to recover urban land value increase with the purpose of 
generating resources to develop the necessary infrastructure to attain a sustainable and balanced growth.
The passing of the New Urban Planning and Building Codes will grant a greater buildable area than the current one. The draft urban land 
value increase act proposes that the developer contributes to the growth and consolidation of the services and infrastructure of the City 
by paying a percentage of the profit it obtains due to the greater buildable area authorized by the City. The proposal states that 94% of 
the contributions collected be allocated to the Urban Development and Habitat Fund to be created by the Act and will be used only for 
funding:

- Social housing and facilities

- Works of transport and services infrastructure

- Public spaces

- Integration of vulnerable neighborhoods

The priority to use these funds will be determined by an “infrastructure ratio”, which will differentiate areas of the City according to amount 
and quality of access to public infrastructure (transport, hospitals, schools, public utilities, culture, etc.) This situation will balance urban 
development, focusing on the most vulnerable people.

The remaining 6% will be allocated to the Fondo Estímulo para la Recuperación de Edificios Catalogados (Heritage-Catalogued Building 
Recovery Promotion Fund), a fund which aims at protecting the City’s architectural heritage.

113

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.3: 
Design a people-oriented city which promotes coexistence and enjoyment 

4.3.6

ART IN NEIGHBORHOODS 

TIMEFRAME

Long-term

STATUS
In progress

STAkEHOLDERS
- City Housing Institute (Office of the Chief 
of Staff - JGM)
- Ministry of Culture
- Ministry of Urban Development and Habitat

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Innovation, talent and opportunities

Diversity, gender and coexistence

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

foster 

Promoting the City’s social and urban integration 
requires  adequate  infrastructure  and  initiatives 
that 
the  development  of  a  united 
citizenship. In order to generate new audiences 
and to stimulate artistic education and creation 
in 
the  city  of 
Buenos Aires develops the Art in Neighborhoods 
Program  which  features  more  than  80  cultural 
trades workshops.

low-income  neighborhoods, 

This  program  promotes  cultural  and  creative 
production skills among the vulnerable sectors 
and takes the activities offered by the Ministry 
of Culture close to these sectors to guarantee 
universal  access  to  culture  for  all  the  City 
residents.

In  addition,  this  program  seeks  to  drive  the 
development  of  cultural  trades  by  offering 
training  and  art  workshops  to  children,  young 
people and adults, with the purpose of training 
artists  and  specialists,  and  facilitating  their 
current or future employment insertion. 

Actions
- Promote cultural outings to encourage cultural 
demand in young people.

large  scale  events  and  strengthen 

-  Plan 
neighborhood events.

-  Give  cultural  trades  training  sessions  and 
workshops.

39

28

55

50
26

43
42

180

Activities per
Neighborhood

102

22

51

59

94

Playón de Chacarita: 39
Barrio 31: 180
Lamadrid: 22
21-24: 94
1.11.14: 87
Los Piletones: 57
Cildañez: 68
Ciudad Oculta: 83
Carrillo: 43
Lugano I yII: 50

Saldías: 28
Rodrigo Bueno: 54
Zavaleta: 59
Juan XXIII: 43
Rivadavia II: 19
Fátima: 56
Barrio 20: 102
Piedrabuena: 42
Complejo Padre Mugica: 26
Soldati: 55

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

83

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Lack of social cohesion

INDICATORS
- Number of workshops given
- Number of activities per neighborhood
- Number of cultural outings

68

56

43

19 87

57

Pillar 4: Social and urban integration

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.3: 
Design a people-oriented city which promotes coexistence and enjoyment 

RECONVERSION OF EQUIPMENT AND URBAN REGENERATION

The City is currently working on the reconversion 
of  infrastructure  which  does  not  meet  the 
urban space current needs, with the purpose of 
building a city on a human scale. Some of these 
facilities  have  become  unused  urban  spaces 
and  even  obstacles  to  a  balanced  growth. 
Therefore,  promoting  resilience  entails  driving 
a better utilization of these facilities in order to 
regenerate the urban space to further sustainable 
development.

Actions
-  Design  a  Master  Plan  for  the  Livestock  Market 
and  regenerate  Commune  7  to  provide  it  with  a 
human scale.
- Build the Mataderos Educational Center.
- Relocate and renew the Olympic Shooting Range 
Center  and  transform  its  current  venue  into  the 
Innovation Park.
- Redesign the old City Amusement Park into an 
open metropolitan park.
-  Relocate  the  Ministry  of  Human  Development 
to  the  building  locally  known  as  Elefante  Blanco 
(White Elephant).
-  Promote  public  space  regeneration  in  the 
neighborhoods  of  Chacarita,  Agronomía  and 
Paternal.

Move the Ministry of Human Development and Habitat to the premises of the building 
locally known as Elefante Blanco  
(action in progress)

The Elefante Blanco is a building, whose construction started in the late 1930s. It was designed 
to  host  the  largest  tuberculosis  hospital  in  Latin  America,  but  the  project  was  cancelled, 
leaving an incomplete structure.

The project of the New Ministry of Human Development involves demolishing the remaining 
structure of the Elefante Blanco building to erect a public park in its place and a new building 
in the adjacent premises. The relocation of this ministry will be one of the elements that will 
be one of the transforming and integrating elements of Barrio 15 (Neighborhood 15). This work 
will give new impetus to the southern area of the City, with thousands of people who will go 
to work every day in the neighborhood and will boost the commercial activity in the area.

4.3.7

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
In progress

STAkEHOLDERS
- Office of the Chief of Staff
- Ministry of Environment and Public Spaces 
- Ministry of Human Development and Habitat
- Ministry of Urban Development and Transport
- Ministry of Education and Innovation

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Urban decay

115

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.3: 
Design a people-oriented city which promotes coexistence and enjoyment 

4.3.8

BA SIN BARRERAS (BA WITHOUT BARRIERS)

The City is crossed by urban barriers that hinder 
residents’  mobility  among  the  neighborhoods. 
Apart  from  the  natural  barriers  placed  by  the 
Riachuelo  river  to  the  Metropolitan  Area  of 
Buenos Aires, there are other barriers that were 
built  under  mobility  precepts,  which  resulted  in 
the fragmentation of the city: the urban elevated 
and ground level highway system, and the railway 
network. 

In  order  to  make  a  people-centered  city,  the 
proposal  is  to  continue  working  on  the  urban 
regeneration  and  improvement  of  the  areas 
beneath  the  existing  highways  to  prevent  them 
from  becoming  neglected  areas.  In  addition,  to 
improve  the  circulation  among  neighborhoods 
split  by  the  metropolitan  railway  system,  new 
viaducts and underground level crossings will be 
built. Finally, new vehicle bridges that will cross 
the  Riachuelo  will  narrow  the  gap  between  the 
City and the Metropolitan Area of Buenos Aires.

The  elimination  of  barriers,  the  opening  of 
streets and the new underground level crossings 
will  result  in  the  improvement  of  travel  time, 

connectivity, road safety and traffic flow. This will 
make the City a more integrated and connected 
space,  with  a  more  secure  and  ordered  traffic. 
For this reason, new streets will be open to offer 
better  access  to  the  neighborhoods  where  the 
railway  runs  across,  something  which  aims  at 
eliminating urban fractures by 2023.

Actions
-  Reduce  the  urban  fracture  produced  by  the 
railways,  by  building  new  underground  level 
crossings and elevating the railways in viaducts.

- Continue with the beautification works beneath 
the existing highways, viaducts and underground 
level crossings.

-  Promote  connectivity  in  the  South  with  new 
bridges and underground level crossings.

-  Extend  concessions  beneath  the  highways  to 
promote investments by tenants.

Art in the City – Urban regeneration beneath the 
highways  (action in progress)
Through  urban  art  the  City  works  to  beautify  the 
areas  beneath  the  highways  to  reduce  the  gaps 
offered  by  the  highway  system  to  the  City  fabric. 
The objective of the interventions is to enhance the 
value and beautify the areas under the bridges that 
connect the City with the neighboring municipalities.

The  city  is  making  art  interventions  in  all  the 
columns,  ceilings  and  walls  to  generate  patterns, 
emotions,  rhythms  and  degradés  which  cause  a 
pleasant experience. The designs were painted in 
nice  colors  functional  to  the  subsequent  lighting 
implemented.

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
In progress

STAkEHOLDERS
- Autopistas Urbanas S.A. (Ministry of Urban 
Development and Transport -MDUyT)
- Ministry of Environment and Public Spaces 
- Ministry of Urban Development and 
Transport
- National Ministry of Transport

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

Security and risk managements

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Vehicle congestion
Climate change
Urban decay

INDICATORS
- Number of underground level crossings
- Number of viaduct km
- Number of regenerated areas beneath the 
highways

Pillar 4: Social and urban integration

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  4.3: 
Design a people-oriented city which promotes coexistence and enjoyment 

BA VUELVE AL RíO (BA RETURNS TO THE RIVER)

The City’s consolidation process made it develop 
giving its back to the Río de la Plata river, using 
the coastal areas for the installation of industrial 
railway and port areas and big facilities such as 
Aeroparque  city  airport  and  the  Electric  Power 
Plant of the City.

In order to face the river and become a coastal 
City  once  again,  interventions  are  required  to 
generate safe and healthy spaces that allow the 
enjoyment,  and  enhance  the  development  of 
the area, releasing part of the port area and the 
railway premises.

These interventions will aim at promoting mixed 
uses by generating urban development through 
new  housing,  stores  and  office  buildings  to 
integrate the area into the urban fabric through 
the opening of streets and the creation of public 
spaces.

Actions
- Design an urban development master plan and 
regenerate the coastline and port areas.

-  Release  the  port  area  and  develop  the  Port 
District.

- Release railway premises in the port area and 
regenerate the urban space in Catalinas Sur.

- Release railway premises in Retiro and develop 
Catalinas Norte II.

- Carry out a cadastral regularization.

- Increase the public space through landfill of the 
coastal area in Costanera Norte.

- Create the Youth District in Costanera Norte.

- Revamp the North Ecological Reserve.

4.3.9

TIMEFRAME

Medium y Long-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
- Ministry of Environment and Public Spaces 
- Ministry of Urban Development and Transport
- Ministry of Government

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Urban degradation

117

PILLAR 5

Security and
risk management

A prepared City, aware of its challenges
and willing to adapt.

5.1 FOSTER CITIZENS WHO ARE INFORMED, PREPRARED AND AWARE OF THE 
CHALLENGES THEY FACE

QUALITY 
EDUCATION

SUSTAINABLE 
CITIES AND 
COMMUNITIES

CLIMATE 
ACTION

PEACE, JUSTICE
AND STRONG 
INSTITUTIONS

5.2 PREPARE THE CITY TO FACE THE IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE

SUSTAINABLE 
CITIES AND 
COMMUNITIES

CLIMATE 
ACTION

5.3 DRIVE INNOVATION AND TECHNOLOGY TO BUILD SAFER SPACES

INDUSTRY, 
INNOVATION AND 
INFRASTRUCTURE 

SUSTAINABLE 
CITIES AND 
COMMUNITIES

PEACE, JUSTICE
AND STRONG 
INSTITUTIONS

119

“A  prepared  city  promotes  a  comprehensive 
management of risks, with special emphasis on the 
tasks of awareness raising and communication with 
all its residents.”

Current Situation

The effects of climate change result in new challenges for cities, which continuously seek to be prepared to and anticipate 
threats in an adequate manner. A prepared city promotes a comprehensive management of risks, with special emphasis on 
the tasks of awareness raising and communication with all residents. In this manner, cities are capable of adapting and can 
overcome disruptive events.

Buenos Aires has developed infrastructure capable of reducing the impact of natural threats, although certain phenomena, 
such as the increasingly heavy and frequent rainfall increases the risk of floods. Its importance lies in the fact that almost 
70% of the population of the City resides alongside one of the 11 basins that go across the city and, if faced with an extreme 
event, 25% of the City may be flooded. Consequently, the Master Emergency Plan (Plan Director de Emergencias) (Decree 
695/2009) defines action protocols for 21 threats, among which heavy rainfall and floods are the main ones.

The City continues to work in adapting its infrastructure to build resilience through structural measures of the Hydraulic Plan 
to reduce water risk. However, it is essential to complement this type of infrastructure plans with non-structural measures 
that develop a better understanding of the risks by the residents of the city of Buenos Aires. Thus, this strategy will seek to 
direct efforts to raise risk awareness through creative and innovative citizen communication and participation plans that will 
allow citizens to know their environment and be better prepared. 

As regards emergency communications, the City is currently implementing the Storm Warning System (SAT, for its acronym 
in Spanish) aimed at anticipating accurately and in real time the arrival of different extreme climate phenomena to the City. 
Considering that coordination and communication are decisive elements of emergency management, the Single Coordination 
and Control Center (CUCC, for its acronym in Spanish) was created as a mechanism to coordinate both emergency agents 
and neighbors in cases of disruptive events. The City also intends to work on generating a risk culture in schools to build 
response and preparedness capacity as well as to escalate the existing first responders’ networks. At the same time, the 
City plans to implement specific funds for mitigation, management and recovery of disruptive events.

Jointly with these initiatives, the Resilience Strategy proposes innovation in the use of public space and urban regeneration. 
In turn, the development of an Integrated Public Security System based on technology, information and citizen participation 
highlights data generation and innovation as central channels in building a more resilient and prepared city.

121

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  5.1: 
Promote citizens who are informed, prepared and aware of the challenges they face 

5.1.1

KNOW BA

The  effects  of  climate  change  result  in  new 
challenges  for  cities,  which  continuously  seek 
to  be  prepared  and  to  anticipate  to  threats 
adequately. The City of Buenos Aires is located 
over  eleven  basins:  (Medrano,  Vega,  White, 
Maldonado,  Radio  Antiguo,  Ugarteche,  Boca-
Barracas,  Ochoa-Elía,  Erézcano,  Cildáñez  and 
Larrazábal-Escalada.  The  first  six  drain  their 
waters into the Rio de la Plata river, while the 
other  five,  into  the  Riachuelo  river,  the  two 
most important rivers of the City. Buenos Aires 
is currently developing an ambitious hydraulic 
plan  which  promotes  adaptation  measures 
to  reduce  the  impact  of  floods,  one  of  the 
most  significant  climate  challenges  faced  by 
Buenos  Aires.  In  this  regard,  the  Resilience 
Strategy  proposes  to  make  active  awareness-
raising  campaigns  simultaneously  with  the 
infrastructure works, to enable city residents to 
get to know and become familiarized with the 
environment  where  they  live.  It  is  through  the 
creation of risk perception that we can promote 
prepared communities and build resilience at a 
local level.

Actions
-  Design  a  comprehensive  risk  communication 
plan that informs the City’s residents about their 
environment, the effects of climate change and 
offers them the tools to proceed adequately in 
case  of  extreme  events  (potential  flooding  or 
heat waves).  
-  Develop  activities  that  highlight  the  basins 
and  streams  running  under  the  City 
(for 
example: outdoor interventions, guided tours to 
experience  centers  and  worksites  to  become 
acquainted with the environment in which we live, 
or to photography or virtual reality exhibitions in 
emblematic  landmarks  showing  how  the  City 
looked like before piping the streams).
- Organize visits to the experience centers in the 
mouth of the streams to allow learning about the 
development of the works and the benefits they 
will bring to the future of the neighborhood.
-  Organize  guided  tours  to  the  CUCC  to 
understand  how  the  City  monitors  flood  levels 
and stream flows, as well as the actions taken 
when faced with different situations.

TIMEFRAME

Short-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
- Environmental Protection Agency (Ministry 
of Environment and Public Space -MAyEP)
- General Directorate of Civil Defense 
(Ministry of Justice and Security MJyS)
- Undersecretariat of Communication
- Ministry of Culture
- Hydraulic Plan Special Projects Unit (UPE 
in Spanish) (Ministry of Urban Development 
and Transport - MDUyT)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES

Heavy storms
Floods
Southeast blow
Climate change
Inadequate infrastructure

INDICATORS
- Number of communication actions related 
to climate change and risk management.
INDICATORS
- Number of neighbors who participated in 
activities related to raising awareness of 
floods.

Pillar 5: Security and risk managements

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  5.1: 
Promote citizens who are informed, prepared and aware of the challenges they face 

Vega stream worksite.

Cleaning of the Cildañez stream.

123

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  5.1: 
Promote citizens who are informed, prepared and aware of the challenges they face 

5.1.2

SCHOOLS GET READY

emergency in their school. This ludic proposal 
is a non-structural measure of communication 
and  awareness-raising  about  the  flood  risk, 
which  accompanies  and  complements  the 
City’s major infrastructure programs.

Actions
- Define and prioritize schools in floodplain areas.
-  Sensitize  and  raise  awareness  of  threats 
(floods, fire, heat waves) in schools.
- Update evacuation protocols.
-  Conduct  the  activities  in  privately  managed 
schools.
- Develop educational material for students and 
teachers supplemental to the school program.

the 

integration  of 

The 
risk  management 
approach  in  the  education  sector  is  essential 
to  increase  awareness  about  the  effect  and 
cause  of  disasters.  Building  resilience  entails 
being  prepared,  and  to  that  end,  it  is  crucial 
to understand the challenges to which we are 
exposed as a city and to be able to anticipate 
them.  Working with little children as agents of 
change  and  replicators  in  communicating  risk 
is one of the central pillars for the development 
of resilient, prepared and safe cities. 
In this regard, the Resilience Strategy proposes 
to  take  comprehensive  risk  management  to 
schools.  La  escuela  se  prepara  (Schools  get 
ready) is a joint proposal of different areas of 
government  which  seeks  to  escalate  the  pilot 
project  implemented  in  the  Regular  Primary 
School  No.  21  “Cnel.  Cornelio  Saavedra” 
where a risk management ludic workshop was 
conducted  with  civil  society  stakeholders,  as 
well as a flood self-evacuation drill led by 10 and 
11-year old students.
Each  student  adopted  a  different  leading  role 
to learn how to act and respond in case of an 

TIMEFRAME

Short-term

STATUS
Pilot project

STAkEHOLDERS
- Environmental Protection Agency (Ministry 
of Environment and Public Space -MAyEP)
- General Directorate of Civil Defense 
(Ministry of Justice and Security- MJyS)
- Hydraulic Plan UPE (Ministry of Urban 
Development and Transport - MDUyT)
- Education for Sustainability UPE (Ministry 
of Education and Innovation - MEIGC)
- General Secretariat and International 
Relations

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Climate change
Floods
Heavy storms

INDICATORS
- Number of schools where the program was 
implemented
- Number of children who participated in the 
workshop
- Number of teachers trained in risk 
management basic knowledge

Pillar 5: Security and risk managements

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  5.1: 
Promote citizens who are informed, prepared and aware of the challenges they face 

NETWORK OF RESIDENTS IN THE FACE OF CLIMATE CHANGE

response  in  case  of  an  emergency  and  giving 
support  to  the  community  during  other  events 
not  considered  an  emergency.  In  this  manner, 
Civil  Defense  will  be  able  to  work  jointly  with 
the  Network  of  Residents  during  emergency 
situations, and this will allow the former to focus 
on more complex tasks.

Actions
- Create a network of residents.

-  Develop  mapping  of  particularly  vulnerable 
residents.

-  Conduct  courses  and  practical  training  for 
volunteer residents.

- Boost campaigns to raise awareness on natural 
and human-caused disasters in the community.

The General Directorate of Civil Defense is part 
of the events and disaster integrated assistance 
system of the City and develops different tasks 
related  to  comprehensive  risk  management 
and  works  both,  on  the  reduction  of  risks 
(prevention, mitigation and preparation) and crisis 
management (warning and response).  In addition, 
it provides emergency response in coordination 
with the other intervening agencies to safeguard 
the life and properties of the population and to 
mitigate the potential risks associated to events. 

However, at the time of facing an extreme event, 
the neighbors and the population that are close 
to the event are generally the first ones to help. 
These first responders are critical at the time of 
acting in case of an emergency, not only because 
they are close to the scene of the emergency, but 
also because they are trusted people among the 
neighbors.

Consequently,  the  Resilience  Strategy  proposes 
to  create  a  network  of  residents  in  the  face 
of  climate  change,  which  will  be  composed  of 
trained volunteers who will receive basic training 
to  respond  in  case  of  emergencies  that  may 
impact  their  communities.  In  this  respect,  the 
City seeks to consolidate mitigation, preparation 
and response mechanisms which are effectively 
integrated into the general planning.

The  Network’s  education  and  training  will  focus 
on providing a secure, responsible and effective 

5.1.3

TIMEFRAME

Short-term

STATUS
In progress with new resilient actions

STAkEHOLDERS
- Environmental Protection Agency (Ministry of 
Environment and Public Space -MAyEP)
- General Directorate of Civil Defense (Ministry of 
Justice and Security - MJyS)
- City Housing Institute (Office of the Chief of Staff 
- JGM)
- Ministry of Human Development and Habitat
- Secretariat of Social and Urban Integration 
(Office of the Chief of Staff - JGM)
- Undersecretariat of Communication
- City Neighbors

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Heavy storms    Floods 
Extreme heat    Power outages
Climate change    Energetic insecurity
Inadequate infrastructure
Lack of social cohesion 

INDICATORS
- Number of volunteer resident members of the 
Network.
- Number of trained volunteer residents.

125

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  5.2: 
Prepare the City to face the impacts of climate change 

5.2.1

HYDRAULIC PLAN

Level Crossing.
Currently,  two  works  are  under  way  for  the 
Basin  of  the  Cildáñez  Stream:  Nágera,  Villa  6, 
Asturias Sur and ARTEH branches (Surplus Water 
Retention  Area)  and  the  Second  Outfall  of  the 
Vega Stream.
The City has committed to complete the works 
corresponding  to  the  Secondary  Branches  of 
the Maldonado Stream Basin and the Secondary 
Branches of the Vega Stream Basin.  
As regards non-structural measures, the City is 
working on the following:
-  Development  of  an  urban  resilience  map 
available to the public.
-  Creation  of  a  storm  warning  system  and  IVR 
messages.
- Raising awareness on water risk by means of 
experience centers and education.

in 

the  main  basins 

The  City  is  built  upon  eleven  basins  that  run 
across  the  city  and  drain  into  the  Río  de  la 
Plata  and  the  Riachuelo  rivers.    Because  of 
climate change effects, storms are increasingly 
more  intense  and  generate  climate  events 
which  exceed  the  runoff  capacity  of  rainwater 
infrastructure.  Almost  70%  of  the  population 
concentrates 
running 
across the City (Maldonado, Vega and Medrano 
streams) and faced with an extreme event, 25% 
of the basin might be flooded.
To  mitigate  the  disruptive  effects  and  adapt 
to  climate  change,  the  City  has  conceived 
the  Hydraulic  Plan,  a  set  of  works  (structural 
measures)  and  programs  and  actions  (non-
structural  measures)  with  the  objective  of 
reducing  the  water  risk  in  the  city  of  Buenos 
Aires.
Among  the  structural  measures,  the  City  has 
worked  on  flood  mitigation  by  building  two 
alleviating  tunnels  of  the  main  outfalls  of  the 
Maldonado stream. Likewise, the pluvial network 
of the Austria, Caaguazú and Escalada branches 
was extended, secondary branches were built in 
the Maldonado Stream Basin, the Boca-Barracas 
pumping  station  No.  5  and  the  Holmberg  and 
Tronador  branches  in  the  Balbin  Underground 

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
In progress

STAkEHOLDERS
- Government of the Province of Buenos Aires 
- Municipalities of the Metropolitan Area of 
Buenos Aires
- Network of Neighbors faced with Climate 
Change
- Secretariat of Communication
- Hydraulic Plan UPE (Ministry of Urban 
Development and Transport - MDUyT)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES
Social and urban integration
 
Environment and sustainability

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Climate change
Floods
Heavy storms

INDICATORS
- New linear km of rainwater piping
- Percentage of Maximum Flooded Area over 
total City area

Pillar 5: Security and risk managements

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  5.2: 
Prepare the City to face the impacts of climate change 

EARLY WARNING SYSTEMS FOR STORMS AND HEAT WAVES

With the purpose of mitigating flood risks, Buenos 
Aires has created a Storm Warning System (SAT, 
for its acronym in Spanish) within the framework of 
the Hydraulic Plan, aimed to anticipate accurately 
and in real time the arrival of storms, southeast 
blows and different extreme climate phenomena. 
This information will be processed at the Single 
Coordination  and  Control  Center  (CUCC,  for  its 
acronym  in  Spanish),  which  will  create  situation 
maps  and  generate  early  warnings  to  better 
prepare the emergency agents and the residents 
in case of emergency situations.
Through  the  analysis  of  big  data,  the  SAT 
generates  georeferenced 
information  at  the 
AMBA  level  regarding  extreme  meteorological 
events, with an accuracy of around 4 km and up 
to 2 hours in advance. Such devices survey the 
status of the City’s groundwater and pipelines to 
assess discharge time and implement measures 
that  range  from  reinforcement  of  sewerage 
cleaning to warnings to Civil Defense, the Police 

and  the  Emergency  Medical  Services  System 
(SAME, for its acronym in Spanish).
In  addition,  warning  systems  will  be  added  to 
early  inform  the  socially  vulnerable  population 
and the population living in risk areas on extreme 
meteorological  events  (rain,  intense  storms  and 
heat waves).  These systems will give information 
on  how  to  be  prepared,  how  to  mitigate  the 
effects of an extreme event and how to respond 
to emergency situations. 
Actions
- Incorporate a weather radar and new weather 
and hydraulic stations in the City and AMBA.
- Create a real time information repository shared 
with AMBA’s emergency teams.
- Enter into agreements with telephony companies 
to generate warnings through the UMTS and with 
Google to include geolocation of individuals and 
warning agents.
- Develop an IVR type early warning system.

5.2.2

TIMEFRAME

Medium-term

STATUS
In progress with new resilient actions

STAkEHOLDERS
-General Directorate of Civil Defense 
(Ministry of Justice and Security - MJyS)
-Telephone companies
- Government of the Province of Buenos Aires 
- Municipalities of the Metropolitan Area of 
Buenos Aires
- Network of Neighbors faced with Climate 
Change
- Secretariat of Science, Technology and 
Innovation (Ministry of Education and 
Innovation - MEIGC)
- Emergency Medical Services System 
(SAME) (Ministry of Health - MSAL)
- National Weather Service
- Undersecretariat of Communications
- Hydraulic Plan UPE (Ministry of Urban 
Development and Transport - MDUyT)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
 Climate change
Floods
Heavy storms
Heat weaves 

127

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  5.2: 
Prepare the City to face the impacts of climate change 

5.2.3

RISK CONTINGENCY AND PREPAREDNESS FUND

Additionally, the creation of an Emergency Fund 
has the purpose of financing emergency activities 
during disasters, while the City Recovery Fund will 
fund recovery and reconstruction activities after 
the disaster occurs.

Since  2004,  the  city  of  Buenos  Aires  has  an 
Emergency  Flood  Subsidy  Fund,  aimed  at 
meeting the needs derived from damages caused 
by extraordinary weather phenomena generating 
floods and overflows in different areas of the City. 
Specifically,  the  Resilience  Strategy  proposes 
to  establish  financial  instruments  for  disaster 
contingency  and  preparedness,  through  the 
creation of a Fund designed for Comprehensive 
Risk Management, an Emergency Fund and a City 
Recovery Fund managed by the City’s Office of 
the Chief of Staff.

to  prevent  or 

The  purpose  of 
the  Comprehensive  Risk 
Management  Fund  will  be  to  finance  projects 
designed 
reduce  disaster 
risks,  understanding  risk  in  a  broader  sense.  
Consequently,  it  would  include  actions  and 
measures  to  mitigate  the  impacts  and  increase 
community  resilience,  such  as  risk  assessment, 
risk  reduction  and 
initiatives  to  build  risk-
prevention capacities.

TIMEFRAME

Medium and Long terms

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
- Office of the Chief of Staff
- Ministry of Economy and Finance
- Undersecretariat of Emergencies (Ministry of 
Justice and Security -MJyS)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Climate change

Unsound municipal finance

Inadequate infrastructure

Pillar 5: Security and risk managements

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  5.2: 
Prepare the City to face the impacts of climate change 

SINGLE COORDINATION AND CONTROL CENTER

in 

During  emergency  management,  coordination 
and  communication  are  crucial  elements.  That 
is the reason why the City has created a Single 
Coordination  and  Control  Center  (CUCC,  for  its 
Acronym in Spanish) to respond to various types 
of  crisis.  CUCC  is  a  multiagency  emergency 
coordination  center  which  gathers 
the 
same  facilities  all  the  agencies  in  the  City  with 
jurisdiction over a crisis.  CUCC enables a quick 
and  comprehensive  response  in  case  of  an 
emergency.
It  has  a  state-of-the-art  information  technology 
platform  and  a  communications  system  for  the 
exclusive  use  of  the  security  and  emergency 
forces.  In this cutting-edge center, warning calls 
are  received,  with  over  2,000  incoming  calls 
daily, requesting intervention in civil and medical 
emergencies, as well as in emergencies related 
to  security,  homeless  people,  building  collapse, 
overflows, fire, among others. In addition, CUCC 
works articulated with the City Monitoring Centers 
controlling more than 7,000 cameras distributed 

in subways, buses and outdoors.
In  case  of  a  massive  event,  this  center  has  a 
Crisis  Room  designed  to  concentrate  in  the 
same  facilities  all  the  authorities  responsible 
of  determining  which  actions  will  be  taken  to 
manage the incident.
To promote resilience, this Strategy proposes to 
supplement the CUCC with the creation of a crisis 
committee  in  which  civil  society  organizations, 
first  responder  networks  and  utility  companies 
participate. 

Actions
- Create a multi-agency coordination center with 
participation of the civil society and utility com-
panies.
- Strengthen the emergency call center.
- Achieve the installation of 10,000 cameras in bu-
ses, subways and outdoors.

5.2.4

TIMEFRAME

Short-term

STATUS
In progress with new resilient actions

STAkEHOLDERS
- Utility companies
- Civil society organizations related to risk 
management
- Undersecretariat of Emergencies (Ministry of 
Justice and Security - MJyS)

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Environment and sustainability

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Floods
Heavy storms
Climate change

129

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  5.3: 
Drive innovation and technology to build safer spaces

5.3.1

TRANSFORMATION OF PUBLIC SPACES THROUGH TACTICAL URBANISM

Building  resilience  entails  generating  innovative 
tools 
that  enable  developing  new  flexible, 
resourceful  and  civic  engagement  proposals, 
which promote the appropriation and use of public 
space  by  the  City  residents.  These  innovative 
and transformation proposals aim at responding 
effectively  to  the  neighbors’  needs,  since  they 
prevent that urban fabric spaces remain unused 
o result in abandoned or insecure places.

Tactical  urbanism  offers  tools  to  change  the 
existing  space  through  temporary  interventions, 
with the purpose of revitalizing underused spaces 
and promoting the re-appropriation of the public 
space by the neighbors. This initiative proposes 
identifying  underutilized  spaces  or  spaces  that 
need  to  be  reconsidered  in  conjunction  with 
neighbors, with the aim of generating short-term 
actions directed at transforming the way in which 
residents use and move around the City.

Actions
- Create mobile libraries.
- Having a parking day available: reconversion of 
parking areas into public space for limited time.
- Promote massive weed elimination: participati-
ve beautification of walkways by planting native 
vegetation.
- Involve citizens in planting urban trees.
- Promote community plant/vegetable gardens in 
walkways.
- Increase emblematic vertical and horizontal sig-
naling.
- Develop new outdoor restaurant decks and bus 
stop platforms.
- Take food events to the Buenos Aires downtown 
area.
- Boost the Street Market Fairs (FIAB, for its acron-
ym in Spanish). 
-  Develop  bicycle  temporary  parking  for  mass 
events.

TIMEFRAME

Short-term

STATUS
New

STAkEHOLDERS
- Neighbors organizations
- Secretariat of Transport (Ministry of Urban 
Development and Transport - MDUyT)
- Undersecretariat of Citizen Security 
(Ministry of Justice and Security - MJyS)
- Undersecretariat of Maintenance of Public 
Space (Ministry of Environment and Public 
Space -MAyEP)
- Undersecretariat of Communications
- City neighbors

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Diversity, gender and coexistence

Social and urban integration

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Urban degradation

Insecurity

Pillar 5: Security and risk managements

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE  5.3: 
Drive innovation and technology to build safer spaces

INTEGRATED PUBLIC SECURITY SYSTEM

Actions
- Train and prepare agents.
-  Create  a  single  event  reporting  system  to 
generate transparency.
- Use different technology devices and systems for 
communications and information development.
-  Allow  civic  engagement  in  decision-making 
related to security matters at neighborhood level.

Security  is  one  of  the  main  concerns  of  both 
the  neighbors  and  the  Government  of  the  City 
to  continue  improving  urban  coexistence  and 
utilizing  the  public  space  as  a  gathering  and 
integration place. To achieve that, it is necessary 
to  have  reliable  and  quality  information  on 
criminal acts.
The City is currently implementing the Integrated 
Public  Security  System,  a  comprehensive  plan 
which  ranges  from  training  the  new  City  Police 
to  strengthening  the  State’s  presence  in  the 
streets,  social  integration  and  promotion  of 
transparency,  and  civic  engagement  through 
the latest technology and information tools. It is 
also a plan that coordinates all the Buenos Aires’ 
law enforcement agents (the Police, firefighters, 
transit and prevention agents, park guards, and 
emergency agents).

Crime Map (action in progress)
The generation of reliable criminality statistics is crucial for the creation of more effective public 
security policies. Thanks to these data, it is possible to dimension the problem of insecurity, 
establish patterns, make accurate diagnosis, and evaluate the effectiveness of our responses. In 
addition, being able to have access to public information is a right of all citizens, as it allows them 
to control and increase their knowledge about the actions of the government and security forces. 

5.3.2

TIMEFRAME

Short-term

STATUS
In progress 

STAkEHOLDERS
- Secretariat of Security (Ministry of Justice 
and Security - MJyS)
PILLARS TO WHICH IT CONTRIBUTES

Diversity, gender and coexistence

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Metropolitan vision            
Data and technology
Citizen participation

QUALITIES OF RESILIENCE

Reflexive

Robust

Inclusive

Integrated

Resourceful

Redundant

Flexible

SHOCkS AND STRESSES
Insecurity

131

Next
steps

133

The Buenos Aires Resilience Strategy is the result of the joint work of multiple stakeholders (local, national and 
international) who have invested an invaluable amount of time, knowledge and experience to contribute to the 
development of the City we want. This combination of knowledge-based collaborative work and management 
to generate better public policies, which not only focus on current issues but also anticipate future challenges, 
is the key of this resilience strategy and a work methodology which must be continued and strengthened.

In addition to the cross-sectorial methodology, the actions reflected in 
this document contribute to a global discussion which, despite having 
its own objectives established at City level, contributes to a central 
debate in other cities, that is, how to build more sustainable societies, 
with a balanced social and economic development in harmony with 
the environment.

After publishing the document, we will continue working to further a 
resilient Buenos Aires at different levels, driving the implementation of 
the strategy and spreading resilience at city, national and international 
levels.

At City level, we will seek to enhance the synergies within the public 
administration  achieved  through  experiences  such  as  the  Cross-
Ministerial  Resilience  Committee  and  the  special  working  groups, 
which  drove  policies  requiring  multi-dimensional  solutions,  such  as 
gender  equity  or  affordable  housing.  At  this  stage,  we  will  seek  to 
further connect the stakeholders who participated in the strategy’s 
joint creation process by generating joint commitments with the private 
sector, bringing together the experience and knowledge of the civil 
society and academia, and generating citizen participation spaces in 
the territory. The partnership made with the AVINA Foundation and the 
MIF to identify opportunities for joint projects with the private sector in 
pursuit of the City’s resilience is a good example of this.

In addition, this strategy aims to transcend the physical boundaries 
of  the  city  of  Buenos  Aires.  Not  only  because  it  is  a  strategy  with 
a  metropolitan  perspective,  but  also  because  the  challenges  it 
responds to are framed in a global debate of resilience construction. 
Thus, we will drive the work started with international partners, such 
as  the  100  Resilient  Cities  Network  and  the  United  Nations.  These 
institutions, among others of which we are already members, allow us 
to have methodological and financial resources, as well as access to 
knowledge. We also want to liaise with other resilient cities which can 
inspire us and with which we can work in order to face the multiple and 
constant urban challenges. In particular, we will seek to collaborate in 
developing more resilient cities in Argentina and the region.

The  construction  of  resilience  in  Buenos  Aires  will  continue  to  be 
a living process and a tool for the City’s international insertion and 
projection to the world, and will highlight its commitment to gender 
equity,  diversity  and  sustainability,  while  continuing  to  promote 
innovation, talent and opportunities for City residents.

Annexes

135

Acronyms

100RC: 100 Resilient Cities
AMBA: Metropolitan Area of Buenos Aires
APrA: Environmental Protection Agency of Buenos Aires
BRT: Bus Rapid Transit
CABA: Autonomous City of Buenos Aires
CAF: Development Bank of Latin America
CEADS: Argentine Chapter of the World Business Council for 
Sustainable Development
CEAMSE: Coordinación Ecológica Área Metropolitana Sociedad del 
Estado (State-owned Company for Ecological Coordination in the 
Metropolitan Area)
CESAC: Centro de Salud y Atención Comunitaria (Health and 
Community Center) 
CFE: Consejo Federal de Education (Federal Council of Education)
CFP: Centros de Formación Profesional (Vocational Training Centers) 
CIM: Centro Integral de la Mujer (Comprehensive Care Center for 
Women) 
CIPPEC: Centro para la Implementación de Políticas Públicas para 
la Equidad y el Crecimiento (Center for the Implementation of Public 
Policies Promoting Equity and Growth)
CRF: City Resilience Framework
CSE: Comprehensive Sex Education
CSO: Civil Society Organization
ECLAC: Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
GCBA: Government of Buenos Aires
GDP: Gross Domestic Product
GGP: Gross Geographic Product
GHG: Greenhouse Gases
ICPD: International Conference on Population and Development
ICT: Information and Communications Technology
IDB: Inter-American Development Bank
ILO: International Labor Organization
INDEC: Argentine National Institute of Statistics and Censuses

IOM: International Organization for Migration
ISVD: Índice de Vulnerabilidad Social frente a Desastres (Social 
Vulnerability to Disasters Index)
IVC: Instituto de Vivienda de la Ciudad (City Housing Institute)
JGM: Office of the Chief of Staff 
LGBTI: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex
MAyEP: Ministry of Environment and Public Space
MDHyH: Ministry of Human Development and Habitat
MDUyT: Ministry of Urban Development and Transport
MEIGC: Ministry of Education and Innovation
MEyF: Ministry of Economy and Finance
MGOB: Ministry of Government
MIF: Multilateral Investment Fund
MJyS: Ministry of Justice and Security
MSAL: Ministry of Health
MSMEs: Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
NES: Nueva Escuela Secundaria (New Secondary School)
PIO: Planes de Igualdad de Oportunidades (Plans for Equal 
Opportunities)
PRA: Preliminary Resilience Assessment 
SAME: Sistema de Atención Médica de Emergencia (Emergency 
Medical Services System)
SDGs: Sustainable Development Goals
SIGBA: Sistema de Indicadores de Género de la Ciudad de Buenos 
Aires (Gender Indicators System of the City of Buenos Aires)
SISU: Secretariat of Social and Urban Integration 
SME: Small and Medium Enterprise
UN: United Nations
UNESCO: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization
UNISDR: United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction
UPE: Unidad de Proyectos Especiales (Special Projects Unit). 
VJG: Office of the Deputy Chief of Government

A. Methodological Process

The  construction  of  the  Resilience  Strategy  for  the  City  of  Buenos 
Aires  entailed  a  process  comprising  3  main  aspects:  bibliographic 
review, participatory process and development of pilot projects.

. Telephone surveys: citizen perception surveys conducted to a sample 
of 1,200 residents of the City were analyzed.

1. Bibliographic Review
a)  Review  of  documents  and  government  plans:  The  different 
bibliographic  documents  that  refer  to  the  Strategy´s  pillars  and 
that  contributed  to  develop  the  current  situation  were  analyzed. 
Additionally,  the  strategic  government  plans  and  those  that  guide 
the  GCBA’s  vision  prepared  by  the  different  agencies,  were  also 
considered.  These  documents  allowed  to  survey  guidelines  for  the 
creation of a comprehensive outlook of the City’s resilience.

b) Review of existing actions and initiatives: 530 public and private 
actions  developed  in  the  City  were  identified  through  an  in-depth 
analysis of the Comprehensive Management Plan, and such actions 
were grouped and catalogued by topics. Based on the main actions, 
interrelations  and  synergies  were  established  under  the  resilience 
lens to develop different initiatives included in this strategy.

c)  Review  of  Resilience  Strategies  of  the  100RC  network:  The 
Resilience Strategies published by the member cities of the network 
were  analyzed  with  the  aim  of  identifying  shared  challenges  and 
surveying opportunities for public policies.

d) Identification of good practices: Based on the review of the existing 
Resilience Strategies, the reports of the specific studies and the tools 
of the Network used, good practices of other cities around the world 
were incorporated and may be replicated in Buenos Aires. This work 
seeks to generate both inspiration and nourishment from international 
resilient practices which can contribute to the development of Buenos 
Aires.  

2. Participatory Process
a) With the purpose of identifying strengths and weaknesses of the 
City of Buenos Aires in the diagnostic phase, a perception analysis 
was conducted:
.  Interviews:  50  exploratory  interviews  were  conducted  with  key 
stakeholders of the public sector (56%), the private sector (16%) and the 
civil society (29%).

. Focus groups: 8 focus groups were conducted with 3 socio-economic 
segments (vulnerable sectors, middle class and lower middle class).

b)  With  the  collaboration  of  the  100RC  network  partners,  ideation 
instances and theme workshops were implemented thanks to the 
use of tools provided by the network.
•  Ideation  workshops:  With  the  collaboration  of  Pacífico,  4  ideation 
workshops  were  organized  in  which  more  than  130  people  from 
the  government,  civil  society  organizations,  the  private  sector  and 
residents participated. More than 500 ideas were proposed to nurture 
the City’s Resilience Strategy. In turn, with the support of the Argentine 
Chapter of the World Business Council for Sustainable Development 
(CEADS,  for  its  acronym  in  Spanish)  an  ideation  workshop  was 
organized  with  8  private-sector  companies  in  which  more  than  40 
actions were conceived.

•  100RC Tools: 

- Problem Framing. With the support of Citymart and 100 RC, a 
workshop was developed to identify innovation opportunities 
aimed  at  improving  urban  solid  waste  management.  27 
stakeholders from different sectors participated at the workshop 
and  33  initiatives  were  ideated.  Based  on  the  identified 
opportunities, 3 reports on initiative strengthening, comparison 
of best practices across cities and recommendations to follow 
by the City of Buenos Aires were made out.

-  Buenos  Aires  Housing  System  Studio.  With  the  support  of 
ARUP  and  100RC,  a  multi-sectorial  workshop  was  organized 
with  government  officials,  civil  society  organizations  and  the 
private  sector  to  strengthen  and  identify  action  proposals 
related to the promotion of affordable housing in Buenos Aires. 
Sixty people participated in this workshop, 198 initiatives were 
ideated,  6  opportunity  were  identified,  and  related  lines  of 
action were designed.

-  Tactical  Urbanism.  With  the  support  of  Street  Plans  and 
100RC,  a  workshop  was  organized  where  the  strategies  to 
regenerate the public space through citizen participation and 
temporary architecture were presented. Twenty officials from 
the  Ministry  of  Justice  and  Security,  the  Ministry  of  Public 
Space, the Secretariat of Transport, and the Housing Institute 
of Buenos Aires participated in this workshop.

137

3. Applied Resilience
a)  Specific  Studies.  With the collaboration of ARUP, 3 studies were 
conducted to strengthen specific topics.

•  Incentives for sustainable construction. A report was made based 
on an in-depth case study of the cities of Mexico and New York, both 
cities internationally renowned for their sustainable design practices. 
The  study  outlined  appropriate  recommendations  applicable  to  the 
local  context  aimed  at  fostering  sustainable  construction  in  the 
regulations of the New Building Code.

•  Teachers of the future. A study was conducted to understand which 
skills will be required from teachers in the future to enable them to 
prepare young people for the jobs of the future. Through research of 
global innovative trends and 11 in-depth interviews to international and 
CABA key representatives, the report gives several recommendations 
for three instances of teaching: teacher attraction, teacher training, 
and teacher retention.

•  Green  walls  and  roofs  in  schools.  A  study  was  developed  to 
evaluate the feasibility of installing green roofs in 146 public schools 
in  the  City’s  Districts  3,  5,  and  10.  The  study  developed  a  tool  that 
enables quantifying the environmental benefits and costs related to 
the installation of the roofs. 

b)  Resilient  pilot  projects.  Three  pilot  projects  were  carried  out 
together  with  different  stakeholders  of  public  agencies  and  the 
private sector, civil society organizations and residents, which enabled 
materializing resilience in the City of Buenos Aires. 

-  Chatbots  Programming.  With  the  purpose  of  linking  young 
people to the world of employment and companies, the students 
from Technical High School No. 35 of the City participated in 

B. Validation Process 

1. Cross-Ministerial Resilience Committee: Resolution No. 22 passed 
by the General Secretariat and International Relations which created 
the  “Resilient  Buenos  Aires”  program  considers  the  importance  of 
developing  a  cross-cutting  urban  resilience  strategy  for  the  City, 
working in a coordinated manner with all government ministries. The 
resolution  establishes  the  Cross-Ministerial  Resilience  Committee, 
composed  of  representatives  from  each  area  of  government,  and 
acknowledges that the Strategy requires the knowledge and technical 
expertise  of  all  ministries  and  agencies  which  contribute  with  their 
policies and projects to build resilience in the City

the “Chatbot for Good” initiative developed by the GCBA and 
Oracle  Argentina.  This  initiative  sought  to  apply  design  and 
programming concepts to solve social and urban issues through 
artificial intelligence. 

- Mobility and gender participatory mapping. With the support of 
Nexo – a civil society organization –, work was done during two 
days with 60 women neighbors from Barrio 20 (Neighborhood 
20)  and  officials  from  the  IVC  to  survey  the  main  mobility-
related  challenges  faced  by  women  from  the  neighborhood, 
using technology and georeferencing tools. A report and a web 
repository  were  made  where  mobility  and  gender  paths  and 
challenges can be visualized in a georeferenced manner. 

-  Risk  management  workshop  and  drill  exercises  in  schools. 
With the support of Nexo – a civil society organization –, and 
together with the General Directorate of Civil Defense of the City 
of Buenos Aires, the Climate Change Operations Management 
Office  under  APrA,  and  the  Education  for  Sustainability  UPE 
under the Ministry of Education, a workshop to raise awareness 
was  conducted  and  a  flood  self-evacuation  drill  game  was 
played with 30 students from grade 4 from Primary School No. 
14 “Cornelio Saavedra”, School District No. 1.

c) Social vulnerability to disasters map. With the support of the School 
of Geography of the University of Buenos Aires and Claudia Natenzon, 
PhD, the City made out a report on social vulnerability to disasters 
and specific risks in the City of Buenos Aires. With the contribution of 
different government areas, a Social Vulnerability Atlas was created 
in  a  GIS-type  web  repository,  consisting  of  6  social  vulnerability  to 
disasters maps and 2 ground heat spots and flood risks atlas. 

The  committee  is  made  up  by  the  Office  of  the  Deputy  Chief  of 
Government,  the  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Staff,  and  the  Ministries  of: 
Government;  Urban  Development  and  Transport;  Environment  and 
Public  Space;  Culture;  Education  and  Innovation;  Health;  Human 
Development and Habitat; Economy and Finance; Justice and Security..

MINISTRY

 

 
AREA

LAST AND GIVEN NAMES

 

Office of the Deputy 
Chief of Government

 

Secretariat of Citizen Development 

Undersecretariat of Human Rights and 
Cultural Pluralism   

 
 

 

Office of the Chief of Staff

 

Government

 

 
 
 
 

Urban Development

and Planning

  
 

Environment and

Public Space

 

 

Secretariat of Planning, Assessment and Management

 

Secretariat of Citizen Culture and Civil Service

 

Housing Institute

 

 

Undersecretariat of Inter-Jurisdictional Affairs and Metropolitan Policy

Minister Unit

Minister Unit

Minister Unit

 
 

 

Secretariat of Transport  

Undersecretariat of Sustainable and Safe Mobility

Undersecretariat of Planning  

Hydraulic Plan UPE  

Environmental Protection Agency 

Environmental Protection Agency 

Environmental Protection Agency 

Secretariat of Urban Hygiene

 

Secretariat of Pedestrian Walkways 

Human Development and Habitat 

Undersecretariat of Social Promotion 

 

Ministry Unit

 

Education and Innovation

Secretariat of Science, Technology and Innovation

Education for Sustainability UPE

Undersecretariat of Smart City

Undersecretariat of Smart City

Emergency Medical Services System

Health

Undersecretariat of Planning

Justice and Security

Undersecretariat of Health Planning 

Undersecretariat of Emergencies

Undersecretariat of Emergencies

Economy and Finance

Culture

Ministry Unit

Ministry Unit

Undersecretariat of Communications

Bertoni, Jorgelina 

 
Bárbara, Mercedes

Casas, Florencia 

López, Ileana 

Roca, Elisa 

Cohen, Graciela
 

Lobos, Inés

Serigos, Facundo 

 

Sandoval, Lilén 

Baker, Tomás 

Bramuglia, Julieta 

Pérsico, María Emilia 

Viana, Alejandro 

Corizzo, Abigail 

Himschoot, Patricia 

Rueda, Alejandro 

Minervini, Benjamín  

Sáenz Reale, Alejandro 

Corgniati, Ariana 

Bernassar, Felicitas 

Gómez Pizarro, Angélica

Maggiore, Agustina

Battista, Diego

Casabella, Mariana

Cagliolo, Mariela

Callejas, Claudia

Flax Marcó, Florencia

Garnica, Raúl

Soria, Diego

Travaini, Ivanna

Goldberg, Gabriela

Gago, Gloria

139

Since the creation of the program, the City called the Cross-Ministerial Resilience Committee for more than 10 meetings. Such meetings had 
different objectives, but mainly focused on presenting progress made in the Resilience Strategy creation process, presenting and giving 
away international good practices, exchanging experiences or participating and getting involved in specific studies, pilot projects or in the 
development of the social vulnerability map.

2. Bilateral meetings with undersecretaries. Bilateral meetings were 
held with different government undersecretaries with the purpose of 
reviewing  pillars,  objectives  and  initiatives  with  the  different  areas 
and  incorporating  their  proposals  and  projects  from  a  resilient 
perspective.

3. Cabinet of Ministers. Within the framework of the Cabinet meetings 
held weekly by the City’s Ministers with the Chief of Government, the 
Resilience team presented the Strategy with the objective of aligning 
the vision and initiatives of each area of government. In addition, the 
inclusion of the long-term plans designed by the City were sought to 
be included in the document

Acknowledgments

The  development  of  Buenos  Aires  Resilience  Strategy  would  have 
not been possible without the support and commitment of multiple 
stakeholders  and  institutions.  We  would  like  to  specially  thank  the 
contributions made by:

100RC 
Michael Berkowitz, Andrew Salkin, Paul Nelson, Eugene Zapata, 
Braulio Morera, Helena Monteiro, Álvaro Soldevila, Maricarmen Landa.

ARUP
Pablo Lazo, José Ahumada, Iñigo Ruiz, Diana Giambiagi, Dima Zogheib, 
Roberto  Arazo,  Carmen  López,  Francesca  Birks,  Raúl  Ciria,  Cristina 
Sanjuan, Sara Candiracci.

International  Committee 

Organizations participating in the process
ACIJ, ACUMAR, Adecco, AVINA, AySA, World Bank, IDB, CAF, CEADS, 
CEAMSE,  Cimientos,  CIPPEC, 
for  the 
Development  of  Peoples,  Red  Cross  Argentina,  Edenor,  Ernst  & 
Young,  Fundación  Bomberos  de  Argentina  (Argentine  Firefighter 
Foundation), Fundación Ciudad (City Foundation), Wildlife Foundation, 
Impacto Digital (Digital Impact), Manpower, NEXO, Oracle Argentina, 
International  Organization  for  Migration,  UNDP  Argentina,  Sancor 
Seguros, Sociedad Central de Arquitectos (Association of Architects), 
TECHO Argentina, Un árbol para mi vereda (A tree for my sidewalk), 
University of Belgrano, National University of General Sarmiento.

Platform Partners
Pacífico, Citymart, Street Plans.

CROs
Andrea Valsagna (Santa Fe), Ares Gabàs (Barcelona), Arnoldo Matus 
Kramer  (Ciudad  de  México),  David  Jácome  Polit  (Quito),  Gabriela 
Elgueta (Santiago de Chile), Sébastien Maire (Paris).

Technical Advice
Claudia Natenzon, María Mérola, Sebastián Anapolsky.

General Secretariat and International Relations Team
Ángeles Arano, Camila Giuliano, Dolores Arrieta, Emiliano Martínez 
Royano,  Horacio  Reinoso,  Ignacio  Coronel,  Isabel  Alfaro,  Jorge 
Giorno, Laura Moizeszowicz, Luciana Roberts, Magdalena Demarco, 
Mariana  Cammisa,  Marina  Picollo,  Marisa  Miodosky,  Martín 
Alessandro, Yamil Asch.

Government of Buenos Aires Officials
Felipe  Miguel,  Fernando  Benegas,  Juan  Ignacio  Maquieyra,  Diego 
Fernández,  Tomás  Galmarini,  Franco  Moccia,  Carlos  Colombo, 
Rodrigo Cruz, Verónica Copola, Nicolás Caputo, Paula Bisiau, Matías 
López,  Pamela  Malewicz,  Eduardo  Macchiavelli,  Ezequiel  Capelli, 
Renzo  Morosi,  Juan  Bautista  Filgueira,  Alejandro  Rueda,  Andrea 
Bruzos, Diego Meiriño, Andrés Larré, Javier Tarulla, Damasia Ezcurra, 
Sebastián Tomaghelli, Matias Zuviria, Agustina Señorans, Maximiliano 
Corach, Juan Pablo Sassano, Néstor Nicolás, Valeria Sikorski, Oscar 
Valcarcel, Alberto Términe, Eduardo Cohen, Karina Leguizamon, Javier 
Salas Bulacio, Gloria Gago, Carla Artunduaga, Gabriel Fucks. 

141

Bibliography

143

Bibliography

National Institute of Technology Education and Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (2016). Identificación de demandas de capacidades 
laborales 2020. Autonomous City of Bueno Aires: ABECEB.

Environmental Protection Agency, GCBA. (2015). Inventarios de Gases de Efecto Invernadero 2000 - 2014.  
Autonomous City of Buenos Aires. Obtained from http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/agenciaambiental/cambioclimatico/mitigacion/inventario-de-
geis

Environmental Protection Agency, GCBA. (2015). Plan de Acción frente al Cambio Climático 2020. Autonomous City of Buenos Aires.

ARUP. (2014). City Resilience Index.

Development Bank of Latin America and Economy and Development Report. (2016). Más habilidades para el trabajo y la vida: los aportes de la 
familia, la escuela, el entorno y el mundo laboral. Bogotá, Colombia: CAF.

The World Bank. (2016). Digital Dividends. Overview.

The World Bank. (April 2016). Disaster Risk Management. Recovered on July 24, 2018,  
from http://www.bancomundial.org/es/topic/disasterriskmanagement/overview

Basco, A. I., and Carballo, M. (2017). Compás millennial: la generación Y en la era de la integración 4.0. IADB.

IADB. Enfoque Educación. (n.d.). Pupitres y pizarrones: ¿Qué más hace falta?  
Recovered on July 24, 2018, from https://blogs.iadb.org/educacion/2016/04/05/infraestructura-escolar/

CEADS. (2011). De 9 a 8. Guía de eficiencia energética para edificios comerciales y de oficinas. PwC.

ECLAC; OEI; SEGIB. (2010). 2021 Metas Educativas. La educación que queremos para la generación de los bicentenarios.  
Madrid, Spain: Organization of Ibero-American States for Education, Science and Culture (OEI).

ECLAC; IOM. (2017). Panorama de la migración internacional en América del Sur. Santiago de Chile.

Cesar, R., and de Villalobos, G. (2014). El Desarrollo Emprendedor y la Escuela Media. La mirada de los jóvenes de la Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos 
Aires. UTN FRBA, General Directorate of Education Quality Assessment of  GCBA.

ICPD. (1994). Cairo Conference.

Dahlstrand, and Stevenson. (2010). Innovative entrepreneurship policy: linking innovation and entrepreneurship in a European context. Annals of 
Innovation & Entrepreneurship. Coaction.

Decree No. 695. (August 12, 2009). Plan Director de Emergencias de la Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires. Autonomous City of Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.

Office of the Ombudsperson of the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires et al. (n.d.). OBSERVATORIO NACIONAL DE CRÍMENES DE ODIO LGBT.

DGEyC. (2018). Pasajeros pagos (en miles) transportados por línea de ferrocarril. Accesos a la Ciudad de Buenos Aires. Años 1993/mayo 2018.

Díaz Langou, G. (2018). El proyecto de Ley de Equidad de Género necesita algunos cambios para ganar efectividad.

Díaz, R., and Rojas, F. (2017). Mujeres y ciclismo urbano. Promoviendo políticas inclusivas de movilidad en América Latina. IADB.

General Directorate of Statistics and Censuses (Ministry of the Treasury GCBA). (2016). EAH 2006/2016. Autonomous City of Buenos Aires. 
Obtained from Porcentaje de viviendas habitadas, hogares y población en villas de emergencia sobre el total de la Ciudad. City of Buenos Aires. 
Years 2006/2016

General Directorate of Statistics and Censuses GCBA. (2011). Precio promedio del m2 (dólares) de departamentos en venta de 2 ambientes 

usados por barrio. Ciudad de Buenos Aires. 4to. trimestre 2006/1.° trimestre 2018. Autonomous City of Buenos Aires, Argentina.

General Directorate of Statistics and Censuses. (2014). El consumo de energía en la Ciudad de Buenos Aires en 2013. Autonomous City of 
Buenos Aires.

General Directorate of Statistics and Censuses. Ministry of the Treasury. (2018). Indicador Trimestral de Actividad. Informe de Resultados 1279. 
Autonomous City of Buenos Aires.

Statistics and Censuses of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Sistema de Indicadores de Género BA.  
Recovered on July 24, from http://www.estadisticaciudad.gob.ar/eyc/?page_id=74588

Etchenique, M. B. (April 2017). La población porteña. Buenos Aires, tierra de migrantes: 4 de cada 10 de sus habitantes nacieron en otro lado. 
Clarín.

Fantini, A. (2018). Trabajo conectado remoto, TCR, la mejor opción. ILO

Multilateral Investment Fund. (n.d.). Economía del conocimiento (Knowledge Economy).  
Obtained from https://www.fomin.org/es-es/PORTADA/areas-tematicas/economia-del-conocimiento.aspx

Frey, C. B., and Osborne, M. A. (2013). The future of employment: How susceptible are jobs to computerisation? United kingdom.

Gallardo, R., Piccinni, M., and Zolkwer, M. (2015). A-Parquear. Hábitat Inclusivo.  
Obtained from http://www.habitatinclusivo.com.ar/revista/a-parquear/4Z

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Concurso Parque en Altura Barrio 31 - Retiro.  
Recovered on July 24, 2018, from http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/desarrollourbano/concursos/concurso-parque-en-altura-barrio-31-retiro

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Parque en Altura. Barrio 31 - Retiro. Informe de participación y espacios públicos.  
Recovered on July 24, 2018, from http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/sites/gcaba/files/info_participacion_ii.pdf

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Parque en Altura: el proyecto. Recovered on July 24, 2018

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Tres mil alumnos de secundaria continúan estudiando.  
Obtained from http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/compromisos/3000-alumnos-de-secundaria-continuen-estudiando

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (2015). El Diseño Curricular para la Nueva Escuela Secundaria. Ciclo Orientado del Bachillerato.  
City of Buenos Aires

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (2016). La escuela que queremos. Profundización de la NES. Autonomous City of Buenos Aires.

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). 23.000 metros de obras hidráulicas y sistema de alerta temprana. Recovered on July 24, 2018,  
from http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/compromisos/23000-metros-de-obras-hidraulicas-y-sistema-de-alerta-temprana

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). 5 nuevas áreas con prioridad peatonal. Recovered on July 24, 2018,  
from http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/compromisos/5-nuevas-areas-con-prioridad-peatonal

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Centro Único de Coordinación y Control. Recovered on July 24, 2018,  
from http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/emergencias/centro-unico-de-coordinacion-y-control

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Defensa Civil. Recovered on July 24, 2018,  
from http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/emergencias/defensa-civil

Government of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Desarrollo Urbano. Recovered on July 24, 2018,  
from http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/areas/planeamiento_obras/obras_hidraulicas/

Government of the City Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Dirección General Relocalización y Gestión Integral de Edificios de Gobierno. Recovered on July 24, 
2018, from http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/desarrollourbano/institucional-ministerio-desarrollo-urbano-y-transporte/dg-relocalizacion-y-gestion-
integral-de-edificios-de-gobierno

145

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Huella Ecológica. Recovered on July 24, 2018  
http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/ecobici/huellaecologica

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). La Ciudad se comprometió a ser carbono neutral para 2050. Recovered on July 24, 2018 from 
http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/noticias/buenos-aires-se-comprometio-ser-carbono-neutral-para-2050

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Llegar a 250 km de ciclovías y a 400 estaciones de Ecobici. Recovered on July 24, 2018, from 
http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/compromisos/llegar-250-km-de-ciclovias-y-400-estaciones-de-ecobici

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Macromanzanas. Recovered on July 24, 2018, f 
rom http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/desarrollourbano/manualdedisenourbano/paisaje-urbano-morfologia/macromanzanas

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Mecánica sencilla: puesta a punto de la bici. Recovered on July 24, 2018,  
from http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/noticias/mecanica-sencilla-de-bici

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Pedaleá la Ciudad. Recovered on July 24, 2018,  
from http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/ecobici/pedalea-la-ciudad

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Permiso de Ingreso a Centro Peatonal. Recovered on July 24, 2018,  
from http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/movilidad/caminandoporlaciudad/permiso-ingreso-microcentro

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Plan Director de Emergencias. Recovered on July 24, 2018,  
from http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/emergencias/plan-director-de-emergencias

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Tarjeta de acceso a bienes culturales para jóvenes y docentes. Recovered on July 24, 2018,  
from http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/compromisos/sistema-de-bonos-culturales-para-jovenes-y-docentes-0

Government of Argentina. (n.d.). Cuatro líneas de colectivo tendrán buses eléctricos a fin de año en la ciudad. Recovered on July 24, 2018, from 
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/noticias/cuatro-lineas-de-colectivo-tendran-buses-electricos-fin-de-ano-en-la-ciudad

Government of the United kingdom. (2016). Procuring the Future: Sustainable Procurement National Action Plan. London.

Government of the City of Buenos Aires. (n.d.). Movilidad. Recovered on July 24, 2018, from http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/movilidad

Gutiérrez, A. (July-December 2012). ¿Qué es la movilidad? Elementos para (re) construir las definiciones básicas del campo del transporte. 
Revista Bitácora Urbano Territorial, 21(2), 61-74. Obtained from http://www.redalyc.org/pdf/748/74826255011.pdf.

INDEC. (2004). Producto Interno Bruto por Provincia.

INDEC. (n.d.). Resultados del Censo 2010. Recovered on July 24, 2018,  
from https://www.indec.gov.ar/nivel4_default.asp?id_tema_1=2&id_tema_2=41&id_tema_3=135

La población porteña Buenos Aires, tierra de migrantes: 4 de cada 10 de sus habitantes nacieron en otro lado. (April 15, 2017). Clarín. Recovered 
on July 24, 2018, from https://www.clarin.com/ciudades/buenos-aires-tierra-migrantes-10-habitantes-nacio-lado_0_B1Az9taal.html

Levy Yeyati, E., Montane, M., y Schteingart, D. (2018). Radiografía del trabajo argentino. Office of the Chief of Staff.

Law No. 2511. (2007). Ciencia, tecnología e innovación de la Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires.

Law No. 26.206. (2006). Ley de Educación Nacional. Argentina.

Law No. 1854. (2005). Ley de “Basura Cero”. Autonomous City of Buenos Aires.

ManpowerGroup. (2016). Las carreras de los Millennials: visión 2020. Datos, cifras y consejos prácticos de los expertos en recursos humanos. 
Argentina.

Mckinsey Center for Business and Environment & C40 Cities. (November 2017). Focused acceleration: A strategic approach to climate action in 
cities to 2030.

MDUyT. (2011). Modelo Territorial de Buenos Aires - 2010 - 2060. Autonomous City of Buenos Aires: GCBA.

Mezzadra, F., y Veleda, C. (2014). Apostar a la docencia. Desafíos y posibilidades para la política educativa argentina. Buenos Aires: CIPPEC 
Foundation.

Observatorio de la Juventud. (2016). Encuesta Joven 2016. Autonomous City of Buenos Aires: General Directorate of Youth Policies.

Pan American Health Organization. (n.d.). Recovered on July 24, 2018, from La OPS/OMS destaca la necesidad de formar más personal de 
enfermería en América Latina y el Caribe: https://www.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=10947%3A2015-pahowho-
highlights-need- train-more-nursing-personnel&catid=740%3Apress-releases&Itemid=1926&lang=es

Price waterhouse Coopers. (2016). Europe’s five key sharing economy sectors could deliver €570 billion by 2025.

Resolution No. 93. (2009). Orientaciones para la organización pedagógica e institucional de la educación secundaria obligatoria. Argentina.

Salvia, A. (2013). Juventudes, problemas de empleo y riesgos de exclusión social. El actual escenario de crisis mundial en la Argentina. Friedrich-
Ebert-Stiftung.

Secretariat of Transport, GCBA. (2016). Plan de Seguridad Vial. Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires. Obtained from  
http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/sites/gcaba/files/plan_de_seguridad_vial.pdf

Seed Enterprise Investment Scheme. (n.d.). Recovered on July 24, 2018, from http://www.seis.co.uk/

Small Business Labs. (2014). Recovered on July 24, 2018, from Top 10 Small Business Trends for 2014:  
http://www.smallbizlabs.com/2013/12/top-10-small-business-trends-for-2014.html

Stefoni E., C. (2017). Panorama de la migración internacional en América del Sur. Santiago de Chile: ECLAC.

TechCity. (2017). Tech Nation 2017. At the forefront of Global Digital Innovation. United kingdom.

The Addeco Group. (2017). Inserción laboral después de los 45. El contexto actual argentino desde el punto de vista empleador. Argentina.

Violencia laboral: qué dicen los datos de la problemática en la Argentina. (March 8, 2018). Chequeado. Recovered on July 24, 2018, from  
http://chequeado.com/el-explicador/violencia-laboral-que-dicen-los-datos-de-la-problemática-en-la-argentina/

W20. (2018). W20’s Perspective on the future of work. Argentina.

Weller, J. (2017). Las transformaciones tecnológicas y su impacto en los mercados laborales. ECLAC

147

