TORONTO’S

FIRST 
RESILIENCE 
STRATEGY

We acknowledge that this strategy was developed on 
the traditional territory of many nations including the 

Mississaugas of the Credit, the Anishnabeg, the Chippewa, the 
Haudenosaunee and the Wendat peoples and is now home to 
many diverse First Nations, Inuit and Métis peoples. We also 
acknowledge that Toronto is covered by Treaty 13, signed with 
the Mississaugas of the Credit, and the Williams Treaties signed 

with multiple Anishnabeg Nations.

2 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

A place where residents feel empowered to help shape 
their communities and where government works in deep 
collaboration with the people it represents to advance an 
agenda of fairness and prosperity for everyone.

A place where we each feel connected to the natural world, and 
where we think about the now as well as far into the future.

Connected to long-term climate and sustainability practices 
that are embedded in how we do things, and allow us to adapt 
to an uncertain, changing climate.

Home. A place where housing is a right, and every resident has a 
safe, decent, and affordable place to live.

Where residents of Toronto will know the history of Indigenous 
people on these lands, past and present, and are committed 
to knowing about, understanding, and acting on Truth and 
Reconciliation, for themselves and the City as a whole. 

A place that creates space for diversity and recognizes every 
resident’s right to the city.

Easy to move around in, whether by foot, on a bicycle, in a car, 
or by transit, with multiple options that are efficient, safe, and 
affordable for every resident. 

A city of connected communities, where residents feel 
heard, share common goals, and have broad empathy and 
understanding for one another. 

A place that is led by brave and caring people who reflect the 
diversity of the communities they represent.

A place where every resident can thrive

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

3

A SHARED, COMMUNITY VISION FOR A MORE RESILIENT TORONTO.TABLE OF 
CONTENTS

CONTENTS

1
0

2
0

3
0

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

WHAT IS RESILIENCE 

STRATEGY PROCESS 

7

Contents

CONTENTS 

4

20

EQUITY AND RESILIENCE 

22

RESILIENT STORIES 

26

A GLOBAL RESILIENCE MOVEMENT 

30

4 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

32

RESILIENCE IN ACTION 

34

BUILDING MOMENTUM ACROSS 

THE REGION 

36

ENGAGEMENT AND RESEARCH 

38

ENGAGING IN CONVERSATIONS 

ACROSS TORONTO 

40

ENGAGEMENT IN A GLOBAL 

RESILIENCE NETWORK 

42

BREAKING DOWN SILOS THROUGH 

PARTNERSHIP 

44

4
0

5
0

RESILIENCE IN TORONTO 

VISION, PRINCIPLES, AND 

46

TORONTO’S RESILIENCE STORY 

48

FOCUS AREAS 

64

TORONTO’S RESILIENCE 

CHALLENGES 

50

EQUITY 

52

CLIMATE AND ENVIRONMENT 

54

CIVIC ENGAGEMENT 

56

COMMUNITIES AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS 

58

HOUSING 

60

MOBILITY 

62

6
0

ACTIONS 

66

LIST OF ALL ACTIONS 

68

PEOPLE AND NEIGHBOURHOODS 

70

INFRASTRUCTURE 

90

LEADING A RESILIENT CITY 

127

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

5

01

6 
6 

Toronto Resilience Strategy
Toronto Resilience Strategy

PLANTING VEGETABLES AT A 
CHILDREN’S GARDEN ON THE 
DANFORTH

01THIS IS TORONTO’S FIRST 

EXECUTIVE    
    SUMMARY

RESILIENCE STRATEGY.  IT SETS 
OUT A VISION, GOALS, AND 
ACTIONS TO HELP TORONTO 
SURVIVE, ADAPT AND 
THRIVE IN THE FACE OF ANY 
CHALLENGE, PARTICULARLY 
CLIMATE CHANGE AND 
GROWING INEQUITIES.

Building the Resilience Strategy was a collective 
effort. We’ve engaged over 8,000 Torontonians in 
conversations about resilience face to face, over 
the phone, on social media, at City Hall, in libraries, 
in parks, and in people’s homes. 

They told us they want a city where every resident 
can thrive, where diversity is nurtured and residents 
have empathy for each other. One where long-term, 
“all my relations” thinking is considered in every 
decision. One where residents know the history of 
Indigenous peoples and are committed to taking 
action for Truth and Reconciliation. One that is 
efficient, safe and affordable, and led by brave and 
caring leaders who reflect the communities they 
serve. 

We have developed a set of 10 goals and 27 actions 
to deliver on this vision. They are organized into 

EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY

three focus areas: people and neighbourhoods, 
infrastructure, and leadership for a resilient city. 
Taking action in each of these focus areas will help 
us achieve the vision.

Making Toronto more resilient requires a focus on 
equity. We know that residents experience resilience 
differently based on which neighbourhood they live 
in, and who they are, including in terms of their race, 
income, and gender. We also know that access to 
safe and liveable homes and reliable infrastructure 
is not equitably distributed across the city. For 
example, apartment towers, where one in three 
low income families live, are disproportionately 
vulnerable to extreme heat and power shortages. 
And we know that vulnerable residents are much 
less likely to participate in civic processes or see 
themselves reflected by government. While Toronto 
is already making exciting strides towards resilient 
neighbourhoods and infrastructure, more can be 
done towards realizing resilience across the city. 

Toronto’s Resilience Strategy builds on a wealth of 
existing and planned efforts to make Toronto more 
resilient. It delivers where there are gaps, brings a 
resilience lens to existing work, and intends to shape 
future plans coming to Toronto in the coming years.

This Strategy is meant to light a spark – to drive 
action at the City and from business, academia, 
non-profit organizations, and residents to build a city 
where everyone can thrive.  

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

7

LETTERS OF 
SUPPORT

CITY MANAGER

/ Chris Murray

Toronto is Canada’s leading economic engine and one of the 
world’s most diverse and livable cities. As the fourth largest 
city in North America, Toronto is home to over 2.9 million 
residents whose diversity of backgrounds and experiences 
strengthen our great city. This number is going to increase 
substantially over the next 20 years as we continue to attract 
residents, businesses and top talent from around the world.

It is vital that Toronto continues to be a great place to live, 
work and play for current and future generations, and that we 
strive for greater resilience. Climate change poses a grave 
threat to all cities around the globe. Toronto is experiencing 
more frequent heatwaves, flooding, extreme cold, and other 
severe weather. Residents and businesses face sustained 
pressure from stresses such as affordability, congestion, and 
aging infrastructure.  It is imperative we act now to prepare 
for and adapt to the changing climate. 

Toronto’s Resilience Strategy presents an approach to 
building a more resilient Toronto. It leverages our current 
strengths and existing initiatives to build resilience, such 
as the City’s Tower Renewal Program, Poverty Reduction 
Strategy, and climate change mitigation strategy, 
TransformTO. It also identifies where improvements are 
needed, and proposes a number of actions to do so – such 
as improved resilience for vulnerable residents in aging 
apartment towers and low-rise housing. The Strategy will 
enable the City to better understand our enterprise risk and 
exposure and appropriately scope our responses through an 
integrated approach.

I would like to extend my thanks to everyone who has 
participated in the development of the Resilience Strategy. 
With the support of 100 Resilient Cities, pioneered 
by the Rockefeller Foundation, the City established a 
Resilience Office to undertake research and drafting of this 
Strategy. The Strategy is a culmination of extensive public 
engagement, collaboration of experts across City divisions, 
agencies and corporations as well as external partners 
and stakeholders, led by Toronto’s Chief Resilience 
Officer, Elliott Cappell. The work undertaken by the Office 
produced not only this Strategy and renewed partnerships, 
but has also resulted in our public service being more 
knowledgeable about resilience and given us resources to 
support the ongoing application of a resilience perspective 
to our work.

Just as our city has an exciting future ahead of us, I 
am confident in our ability to identify and address the 
challenges facing Toronto. I look forward to continuing our 
discussions with other international cities on our common 
goals, leveraging each other’s experiences and sharing our 
strategies. With the support from our network and partners, 
City Council, the public, and our excellent public service, 
I am confident we will make Toronto a more equitable, 
liveable, prosperous and resilient city.

Chris Murray

8 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

TORONTO CHIEF RESILIENCE OFFICER, 
ELLIOTT CAPPELL AT THE VISION AND 
PRINCIPLES WORKSHOP, SEPTEMBER 2018

CHIEF RESILIENCE OFFICER 

/ Elliott Cappell

The inherent connection between resilience and equity is 
fundamental to our Strategy. 

Housing affordability was also an important part of many, 
if not most, of the conversations we had in developing this 
strategy. Affordability is a major issue undermining equity; 
and affordability is exacerbated when basements flood, or 
when heatwaves make apartments unliveable. That is why 
two of our four priority actions focus on housing.

Resilience is a process - you are never ‘resilient enough’. 
This is not the City’s first investment in resilience, but we 
called this Toronto’s ‘first’ Resilience Strategy on purpose. 
As the city continues to change, learn, and grow, our 
resilience challenges will also change. From artificial 
intelligence to migration, the changing nature of work to an 
aging population, we need to keep investing in resilience; 
to continue participating in this process. I hope that beyond 
this first Strategy, the City and our partners will take up 
resilience and use it to continue building a Toronto where 
everyone can thrive.

Elliott Cappell

I am incredibly excited and thankful to share Toronto’s first 
Resilience Strategy with you. The Strategy is the result of 
an exciting collaboration that spans over 80 organizations, 
8,000 Torontonians, and every neighbourhood in Toronto.

Cities around the world are engaging with resilience, 
ranging from racial equity in Boston, to migration in Byblos, 
to seismic risk in Wellington. In Toronto, we focused on 
the intersection of two of our biggest challenges: climate 
change and equity. 

I grew up in Toronto, but the city today hardly resembles 
what I remember. The pace and scale of change in this city 
is unique: a ‘hotter, wetter, wilder’ climate; incredible growth 
and change in our built environment; and a globalized 
population where more than half of Torontonians were born 
outside of Canada. Toronto is growing unlike any other city 
in the world.

However, as the city grows, there are neighbourhoods and 
residents that are not benefitting enough. Toronto has more 
cranes in the sky than any city in North America, yet nearly 
one in five Torontonians lives in an aging apartment tower. 
Many neighbourhoods are booming, but more than half of 
the neighbourhoods in this city are now ‘low-income’.

Our analysis shows there is a clear overlap between those 
who are not benefitting enough from growth and those 
who are vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

9

AT SHAD CANADA’S SHAD|FIVE EVENT, FEATURING 
ENTREPRENEURS WHO ARE INNOVATORS, 
INFLUENCERS AND CHANGE MAKERS, GUEST 
SPEAKER SHARON AVERY IS SEATED BETWEEN 
SHAD FELLOWS EVA GREYEYES AND JAY HAMIDOVA 

HEAD OF STEERING 
COMMITTEE 

/ Sharon Avery

As chair of the Resilience Steering Committee I have come 
to see that resilience is, without a doubt, our most powerful 
weapon against the chronic stresses we face here in Toronto 
- entrenched and growing poverty, the inequities that 
perpetuate it – and the acute shocks that exacerbate them. 
This past year, in particular, two events brought home the 
latter for us. 

Working with the City on the #TorontoStrong effort this year 
was a wakeup call. When the van struck on Yonge Street we 
were not prepared. We did our best to support those most 
directly impacted as quickly and respectfully as we could. 
But we had no ability to reach beyond the immediate victims 
to meet the needs of bystanders and neighbours who were 
also deeply affected. Some of them had supports to help 
them deal with PTSD and other impacts. Others were left on 
their own with no roadmap or support system in place. The 
same was true for the Danforth shooting.

The second example, the 650 Parliament Street fire, 
reminded us how our most vulnerable are doubly victimized 
when accidents and extreme weather strike. We’ve asked 
ourselves since: What are the similarities and differences 
between our response to a mass act of violence and an 
accident or natural disaster? Why was there an outpouring 
of generosity following the van attack and the Danforth 
shooting but less so following the fire and the flood on 
Parliament Street? 

I find myself with more questions these days than answers. 
But I am clear on two things. The work of the Resilience 
Office had a powerful impact on Toronto Foundation. It 
helped bring the weight of the global to our local work 
and it gave focus and new relationships to what we do in 
neighbourhood improvement areas across Toronto. What 
I am also sure of is that the City must continue the work it 
started on resilience.

The Resilience Strategy offers a central, linked up 
mechanism for the City and all its stakeholders to align 
in the face of our many challenges. The Rockefeller 
Foundation was prescient when it created this program 
and there is a growing community of interest and expertise 
on how to prepare the cities of the future to weather all 
that will come. 

On behalf of all the members of the Resilience Steering 
Committee, I would like to encourage the City and our 
partners to take up the vision and actions in the Resilience 
Strategy. Excellent progress has been made in a very short 
time but there is much work still to be done to ensure 
that Toronto is equipped to withstand the inevitable and 
growing challenges we will face in the months and years to 
come.

Sharon Avery

10 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

GLOBAL CHIEF RESILIENCE OFFICERS, RESILIENCE 
PRACTITIONERS, AND 100 RESILIENT CITIES STAFF 
AT THE GLOBAL RESILIENCE SUMMIT IN 2017.  PHOTO 
COURTESY OF THE ROCKEFELLER FOUNDATION

100 RESILIENT CITIES

On behalf of the 100 Resilient Cities (100RC) team, I want 
to congratulate Mayor Tory and the City of Toronto on the 
release of Toronto’s Resilience Strategy - the first of its 
kind in the city. Toronto is an important and dynamic city, 
the largest in Canada and the 4th largest in North America. 
The city has been consistently recognized as one of the 
world’s most livable cities, in part because of its vibrant 
arts and cultural scene, beautiful neighbourhoods, safe 
communities, stable economy, and presence of world-
leading companies. People flock to Toronto from around 
the world bringing their talents, their traditions, and their 
dreams, and the city celebrates its vast array of cultures 
within its communities.

Like any major metropolis, Toronto faces significant 
social, cultural, environmental and economic challenges, 
despite its many strengths. The challenges themselves 
are complex and diverse, just like Torontonians. Equity, 
housing affordability, mobility and the effects of climate 
change were key themes brought forward through an 
extensive consultation process during the development of 
the Strategy. The City must act boldly and that’s why the 
Strategy is such an important milestone for the City and for 
our partnership. 

At the heart of Toronto’s first Resilience Strategy is a 
vision of a more connected city, and central to that is the 
intersection of equity and climate action. Toronto has 
become a city divided among racial and socioeconomic 
lines, and barriers to opportunity persist. Toronto’s 
first Resilience Strategy boldly prioritizes vulnerable 
populations, as they are disproportionally impacted by the 

shocks and stresses the city faces, including those related 
to climate change.   

Through the Strategy, Toronto has brought forward exciting 
resilience initiatives. This includes a program to develop 10 
Neighbourhood Resilience hubs across the city through a 
partnership with local Millennial and Gen-X philanthropists.  
New hazard mitigation planning, specifically for flood 
and extreme heat, will focus on reducing the impacts of 
future disasters while prioritizing vulnerable communities. 
The Vertical Resilience project enables wide scale deep 
retrofits of apartment towers to help a large population of 
Torontonians build resilience - an ambitious undertaking 
that will require forward thinking and creative partnerships.

The strength of Toronto’s first Resilience Strategy comes 
from the voices of the thousands of people who worked 
collaboratively and brought their personal stories to identify 
the city’s vulnerabilities, and to propose ambitious but 
practical actions. By taking thoughtful and bold actions 
today that address its chronic stresses and future shocks, 
Toronto will remain a global leader in city building, and 
thrive in the face of its resilience challenges. 

While this strategy is a major milestone, the real work of 
implementing its actions begins today. 100RC commends 
the City of Toronto for bringing this strategy to fruition and 
embedding the principles of urban resilience into the fabric 
of the city. We are very honoured to have been a part of 
Toronto’s resilience journey.

Michael Berkowitz
President, 100 Resilient Cities

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

11

Toronto’s Resilience Context

Home to a diverse population of more than 2.9 million people, Toronto is Canada’s most populous city 
and the fourth largest in North America. It is a global centre for business, finance, arts, and culture, 
and is consistently ranked as one of the world’s most livable cities. For thousands of years before 
colonization, it was a place where many Indigenous communities would meet to trade, exchange ideas, 
and solve resilience challenges; today, Toronto continues to be a place for creating innovative solutions 
to resilience challenges. 

However, Toronto has experienced a surge of growth over the past 20 years which has brought new 
opportunities and challenges. Through extensive public and stakeholder engagement, Torontonians 
identified six top resilience challenges facing the city, and proposed ‘where we want to be’ to overcome 
these challenges: 

EQUITY
People have access to the things they 
need to thrive.

CLIMATE AND ENVIRONMENT
Coordinated large scale climate 
mitigation and adaptation efforts.

CIVIC ENGAGEMENT
Everyone is engaged in decision making, 
and we have a high level of trust in 
government.

COMMUNITIES AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS
Silos are broken down and we work 
together to solve problems locally.

HOUSING
Diverse housing solutions ensure broad 
housing affordability.

MOBILITY
We have multiple reliable, affordable, 
accessible, and safe mobility options.

The development of this Strategy was 
supported by 100 Resilient Cities, pioneered 
by the Rockefeller Foundation. 100 Resilient 
Cities is a global network of cities that supports 
a view of resilience that includes not just the 
shocks — earthquakes, fires, floods, etc. —
but also the stresses that weaken the fabric 
of a city on a day-to-day or cyclical basis.  
Supporting cities in 47 countries, 100RC has 
worked with the City of Toronto to leverage the 
resources and best practices of the network.  
Over the coming years, there are opportunities 
to further strengthen this relationship during 
the implementation of this Strategy.

12 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

Here’s how the Strategy is organized:

Resilience 
challenges describe 
Toronto’s resilience 
context

The community-led 
vision articulates 
our aspirations for a 
resilient Toronto

The Strategy is 
organized into 
three focus areas to 
achieve our vision

EQUITY

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

CIVIC 

ENGAGEMENT

COMMUNITY AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

HOUSING

MOBILITY

VISION

PEOPLE AND 

NEIGHBOURHOODS

INFRASTRUCTURE

LEADING A 

RESILIENT CITY

including 3 priority 
actions in Focus Area 
A, and 1 priority action 
in Focus Area B

3 GOALS

3 GOALS

4 GOALS

5 ACTIONS

12 ACTIONS

10 ACTIONS

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

13

ABCToronto is home to some of the most 
exciting resilience-building initiatives in the 
world, including:

Resilient People and Neighbourhoods
In partnership with the Resilience Office, the Toronto 
Foundation’s Neighbourhood Resilience Project supported 
ten resilience hubs across the city. Each hub engaged 
diverse local residents to design resilience projects in their 
communities. In this project, Toronto’s Millennial and Gen 
X philanthropists, the City of Toronto, Toronto Foundation, 
community leaders, and residents partner together to build 
community resilience.

Resilient Infrastructure
At the mouth of the Don River, 
the City, Province, and Federal 
government have partnered on 
a precedent-setting undertaking 
aimed at revitalizing the River. It 
will be transformed into a healthier, 
more naturalized river outlet and 
will provide critical flood protection 
to over 240 hectares of Toronto’s 
eastern waterfront. This flood 
protection project also supports 
wider revitalization of the Portlands, 
such as the development of the 
climate-positive Villiers Island and 
flood protection of the future East 
Harbour neighbourhood.

Leading a Resilient City
The City of Toronto’s online Equity Lens tool guides 
staff through an equity analysis to identify and address 
barriers that may be experienced by equity-seeking 
communities and Indigenous peoples in accessing City 
services. The Lens can provide valuable information at 
any stage in the process and can be used by individual 
employees or incorporated into team meetings or 
brainstorming sessions.

14 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

Building on Toronto’s momentum

The City, residents, communities, industry, academia, and other partners are also taking action to 
make Toronto a more resilient city. At the City of Toronto alone, there are at least 50 major plans being 
delivered that advance the vision of a more Resilient Toronto:

MANY RECENT AND 
ONGOING PLANNING 
EFFORTS CUT 
ACROSS MORE THAN 
ONE RESILIENCE 
CHALLENGE

NEW IN 
2019/2020

UPDATE IN 
2019/2020

MOBILITY

EQUITY

HOUSING

COMMUNITIES AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

CIVIC 

ENGAGEMENT

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

15

An inclusive, city-wide, and 
international process

Building the Resilience Strategy was a collective effort over a two year process. We’ve engaged over 
8,000 Torontonians in conversations about resilience, whether in person, over the phone, on social 
media, at City Hall, in libraries, in parks, or in people’s homes. We also leveraged experience from cities 
around the world, including Sydney, Rotterdam, Milan, Boston, and Los Angeles, plus our Canadian 
peers Montreal, Calgary, and Vancouver.

JUNE – DECEMBER 2017

JANUARY – NOVEMBER 2018

PRELIMINARY 
RESILIENCE 
ASSESSMENT

SHOCKS AND 

STRESSES

16 THEMES

155 ISSUES

220+ WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS
400+ ONLINE SURVEY RESPONSES

16 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

400+ WORKSHOP 

PARTICIPANTS

200+ SHORT STORIES

500+ SURVEY RESPONSES
6,000+ TELEPHONE TOWN 

HALL PARTICIPANTS

JANUARY – NOVEMBER 2018

DECEMBER – MAY 2019

6 RESILIENCE 
CHALLENGES

VISION

10 GOALS

27 ACTIONS

3 FOCUS 
AREAS

A SHARED VISION FOR 

A MORE RESILIENT 

TORONTO

PEOPLE AND NEIGHBOURHOODS

INFRASTRUCTURE

LEADING A RESILIENT CITY

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

17

A strategy in three focus areas

The Resilience Strategy is organized into three focus areas, with goals that directly address Toronto’s 
resilience challenges and achieve the vision.  The diagram below shows the interconnections between 
our focus areas, goals, and resilience challenges.

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

CIVIC ENGAGEMENT

COMMUNITIES AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

HOUSING

MOBILITY

18 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

GOALS 

 

 

  

             FOCUS AREAS

1.  Toronto has resilient, safe, affordable homes

2.  Communities take action to improve resilience in their 

neighbourhoods

3.  Poverty is eliminated and equity is improved

1.  Toronto is more resilient to climate change, including the 

hazards of flooding and heat

PEOPLE AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

2. 

Infrastructure and buildings are resilient to a changing 
climate and reduce greenhouse gas emissions

INFRASTRUCTURE

3.  Toronto has multiple reliable, affordable, and safe mobility 

options that reduce the amount of time it takes to get 
around

1.  Civic engagement and trust in the City improve, and 

leadership better reflects Toronto’s diversity

2.  The City prioritizes the most vulnerable people and highest 

risk in decision-making

3. 

Indigenous communities have a leadership role in  
building resilience

4. 

Institutionalize resilience into the City’s decision-making  
and take leadership on resilience

LEADING A 
RESILIENT CITY

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

19

ABCWHAT IS 
RESILIENCE

02 WHAT IS 

RESILIENCE?

Urban resilience is the capacity of individuals, communities, institutions, and 
systems within a city to survive, adapt, and thrive in the face of the chronic stresses 
and acute shocks they experience.

What is a shock?
A shock is a sudden sharp event that threatens the immediate well-being of a city. In Toronto, we face 
potential shocks due to flash storms that lead to flooding, heatwaves, blizzards and cold snaps, and 
power outages.

What is a stress?
A stress is chronic, meaning it plays itself out day after day. Stresses can weaken the fabric of our 
city, and impact our ability to bounce back in response to a shock. In Toronto, these stresses include 
growing economic inequality among residents, a worsening housing crisis, difficulty getting around, and 
ageing infrastructure.

ENJOYING EDWARDS GARDENS, 
PHOTO BY JAMIE LYNCH, SUBMITTED 
TO THE SNAP & SHARE PHOTO 
CONTEST, 2014

20 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

TO SURVIVE, 

 
we need to help residents, communities, households, 
businesses, and the City prepare to bounce back from 
unexpected shocks, which can stretch emergency 
services and leave lasting impacts on those affected. 
Further, we know that income, mobility, age, disability, 
location, and English-language skills play a central role 
in determining how people prepare for, are affected by, 
and bounce back from shocks, so we need to prioritize 
preparing our most vulnerable residents.  

TO THRIVE, 

 
we need to ensure that all Torontonians can benefit 
equally from a more resilient and prosperous future. 
The ability to thrive is rooted in the opportunity 
for residents and communities to all start from the 
same place. Growing economic divides across our 
neighbourhoods erode our social cohesion in ways 
that will become harder and harder to overcome in a 
climate changed world. To thrive, we need to confront 
our uncomfortable histories and promote prosperity 
through new relationships with neighbourhoods and 
residents that often find themselves outside of the 
decision-making process. 

TO ADAPT, 

 
we need to adjust city-wide practices to 
prepare for the challenges of the 21st century, 
including a changing climate and a rapidly-
growing city that has become more unequal 
over time. We need to adapt in ways that put 
the needs of the most vulnerable members 
of our society first, because they are usually 
affected the most by both shocks and stresses. 

Building resilience is about 
transforming the fabric of our 

city so that we can all work 

together to meet the challenges 

of the 21st century and share 
in a more prosperous future for 

everyone. 

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

21

Equity and Resilience

Advancing equity is a core component of building resilience. The ability of 
a city to survive and thrive in the face of challenges is as much about the 
strength of its communities and neighbourhoods as it is about the design 
and management of its infrastructure and buildings. 

Equity is distributing opportunities and resources by accommodating different needs and removing 
barriers in order to level out unfair and unjust outcomes so that all individuals can benefit. Advancing 
equity is a core component of building resilience. The ability of a city to survive and thrive in the face 
of challenges is as much about the strength of its communities and neighbourhoods as it is about the 
design and management of its infrastructure and buildings.

Equity was also, by far, the top theme that emerged from engagement with residents, who shared that 
things like a lack of affordable and stable housing, a lack of reliable transit, concern about community 
safety and loss of life, and discrimination in finding employment, all impact their ability to be resilient.

Equity, vulnerability, risk and resilience.

On the afternoon of August 21, 2018, a catastrophic failure in the building’s electrical system ignited 
a fire inside 650 Parliament Street, an ageing apartment tower in Toronto’s downtown St Jamestown 
neighbourhood. The fire grew quickly in intensity, sending thick clouds of smoke throughout the building, 
forcing it to be evacuated.

Though firefighters were able to get the fire under control without any loss of life, all of the building’s 
approximately 1,500 residents were told they could not come back – for months. Many of the residents 
of 650 Parliament, like Sameia Bashir (read more about Sameia on page 27), were relative newcomers to 
Canada, living on low incomes, and without a dense network of family and friends to rely on in their time 
of need. Many were refugees, still experiencing the trauma that brought them to Canada, and now newly 
traumatized and scared. For months, hundreds 
of these displaced residents bounced around 
from hotel room to hotel room, feeling 
stressed and paying out of their own pockets 
for expenses that many could not afford, 
despite support from the City and community 
organizations.

I think resilience is definitely a social justice 
issue. Some communities are at greater risk 
than others, so it's harder to be as resilient. 
Personally [through] my photography, I think 
seeing the city react to trauma, whether other 
problems or resilience related, definitely has 
changed how I ...see the people who live in it.

22 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

– MARIA RIO, TORONTO-BASED STREET PHOTOGRAPHER

This story helps illustrate the strong link between 
equity and resilience. 40% of families living in 
towers are low income. Apartment buildings 
are also home to many newcomers and seniors. 
These groups may be more heavily impacted by 
shocks because they may not have the resources 
to pay for a hotel room or a social network of 
family and friends with an extra room. People 
living in apartment towers are also often more 
exposed to shocks. Apartment buildings that are 
poorly maintained are at greater risk of failure, 

and even the best-maintained buildings may be 
at risk from shocks, like storms or other extreme 
weather, since people in towers cannot always 
easily exit the building and many do not have 
back-up power that allows residents to shelter in 
place (learn more about towers and resilience on 
page 75). 

Inequities increase both the way a person is 
impacted by a shock, and a person’s exposure to 
a shock.

Not all communities will be affected equally by climate change. Equity-seeking groups face an unequal 
distribution of opportunities and resources, and therefore face greater challenges preparing for, 
responding to, and recovering from climate shocks and stresses.

Toronto equity 
seeking groups

The City recognizes the following equity-seeking groups:

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Immigrants & refugees
Persons with disabilities
Persons with low income
Racialized groups
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans, queer &  
Two-Spirit (LGBTQ2S) communities
Undocumented individuals
Vulnerable seniors
Vulnerable youth

• 
• 
• 
•  Women

The City recognizes other groups that face inequities:
• 
• 
• 
• 

Indigenous peoples*
Victims of violence 
Persons who are homeless or under-housed 
Residents in Neighbourhood Improvement Areas

There are also groups that are not 
always equity-seeking groups, but are 
more vulnerable to climate change, 
according to academic literature:

Outdoor workers are more exposed to 
climate change. People with pre-existing 
health conditions are more sensitive to 
climate change. 

THIS DIAGRAM IS A SIMPLIFIED 
REPRESENTATION OF THE OVERLAP 
BETWEEN EQUITY-SEEKING GROUPS 
AND CLIMATE VULNERABLE GROUPS

climate vulnerable 
populations

*While Indigenous peoples in Toronto face inequities, they are not listed as an equity-seeking group.
Indigenous peoples are the original inhabitants of what is today Toronto, and have a special status
recognized under section 35 of the Constitution. Many believe that Indigenous peoples do not seek
equity but rather reconciliation and a restoration of the health, wellness, self-determination and
sovereignty, which were eroded through historical and ongoing colonization.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

23

There are many other examples. Black 
Torontonians, for instance, are more likely to 
commute using public transit and have longer 
commute times than average (learn more on 
pages 62-63), and so are more likely to be 
impacted by a disruption in the transit system. 
Indigenous people are overrepresented in the 
homeless population that sleep outdoors, and so 
are more vulnerable to heat waves and extreme 
cold weather (learn more on page 55).

Resilience takes into account both risk (exposure 
or likelihood of experiencing a shock or a stress) 
and vulnerability (how you are impacted by a 
shock or a stress). 

See pages 52-53 for more detail on equity in 
Toronto.

Inequity impacts the entire city’s 
resilience.

Inequity impacts the entire city’s resilience. When 
certain groups are at higher risk to shocks and 
stresses or are more vulnerable, the entire system 
is stressed because those groups experience 
more shocks and stresses, and experience them 
with greater intensity. Deep inequities polarize 
a city, making residents more segregated, less 
trusting of each other and of government, and 
less able to agree on solutions to the biggest 
challenges.

*FROM “ALL MY RELATIONS: AN ANTHOLOGY OF 
CONTEMPORARY CANADIAN NATIVE PROSE” BY 
THOMAS KING (1990)

24 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

A resilient city prioritizes equity: “All my 
relations” thinking

It makes sense to prioritize resources and 
preventative action for communities that are the 
most vulnerable and at highest risk in resilience-
building efforts.

A focus on equity is aligned with an “all my 
relations” Indigenous worldview. While different 
Indigenous communities have diverse sets of 
knowledge, many local Indigenous communities 
and communities across Canada share a 
teaching that could be translated in English as 
“all my relations”. According to Thomas King, 
‘all my relations’ “reminds us of the extended 
relationship we share with all human beings*. But 
the relationships go further, the web of kinship 
to animals, to the birds, to the fish, to the plants, 
to all the animate and inanimate forms that can 
be seen or imagined. More than that, “all my 
relations” is an encouragement for us to accept 
the responsibilities we have within the universal 
family by living our lives in a harmonious and 
moral manner”. The Resilience Strategy’s focus on 
equity is guided by the “all my relations” teaching.

In practice, the link between resilience and equity 
means the City should:
•  Provide support and enable communities 
facing inequities to take resilience action;
•  Work hard to include the voices of equity-

seeking and other vulnerable groups in 
decision making, and ask on an ongoing basis 
‘who is missing from the room?’;

•  Design policies and programs to address the 
needs of those most vulnerable to and at risk 
of shocks and stresses; and 

•  Prioritize measuring the impacts of programs 

on equity-seeking groups during program 
evaluations

Images from the

Campaign

LEARN MORE AT WWW.TORONTOFORALL.CA

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

25

Resilient Stories

All films can be accessed on Youtube through 
our website at toronto.ca/resilience.

Resilience Is
This film, produced by the Resilience Office, tells the story of 

MJKO, an organization that works with youth in Parkdale to 

build resilience through sport.

Resilient People: Joe, Husam & Keosha
This series of resilient stories is the work of filmmaker Mike 

Regis, who won an Artsworks Grant that supports youth 

employed in Communications. It features three Torontonians 

from diverse backgrounds sharing their stories of resilience. 

To learn more about resilience, we 
asked Torontonians to share their 
lived experiences through stories.

Our Resilient Stories campaign was at the heart 
of the entire process to develop the Strategy. It 
included a campaign to collect people’s stories 
online, on postcards, through conversations with 
communities, and through the development of 
short films, for which we provided a small number 
of micro-grants. By asking people to share their 
stories, we recognized that complex resilience 
challenges can ultimately be boiled down to 
simple everyday experiences. 

For example, a lack of access to housing may 
be described through residents’ stories of 
of spending years on an affordable housing 
waitlist. Creeping poverty and inequality may 
be described through stories about the lack of 
access to affordable, healthy foods. Ice storms 
and heatwaves may be described in stories about 
coping mechanisms for long stretches without 
power.

These everyday experiences helped us gain 
insight into the big city-wide challenges that this 
Strategy aims to tackle. 

Video Campaign

We used videos to shed some light on how 
Torontonians from different walks of life and 
different communities experience resilience 
in their everyday lives. This included seven 
community-produced films, financed through 
micro-grants provided by the Resilience Office 
and showcased on page 27.

26 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

Resilient People: Mihret
This Resilient Story comes from Silent Voice, a Toronto-based 

organization that offers community and family-based support 

to Deaf children and adults in American Sign Language. The 

film tells the story of Mihret, a deaf refugee from Eritrea, and 

how Silent Voice helped her and her family to build their 

resilience.

Resilient People: Nellys
This Resilient Story comes from the folks at the Mennonite 

New Life Centre, and features Nellys Garcia, an artist who 

came to Toronto from Venezuela. In it, Nellys talks of the 

challenges of being a newcomer in Toronto.

Resilient Communities: St. Jamestown 
This Resilient Story comes from local filmmaker Gregory 

Greene and the folks at CREW (Community Resilience to 

Extreme Weather). It follows some of the people affected by 

this summer's fire at 650 Parliament Street as they struggle 

to bounce back from that significant shock, and outlines how 

CREW is helping.

Resilient Organizations: Davenport-Perth & 
Second Harvest 
This Resilient Story comes from the folks at the Davenport-

Perth Community Health Centre and follows the volunteers 

who make their Community Dining Program - a partnership 

with Second Harvest - possible. Through the program, the 

Centre provides free nutritious meals to one hundred or more 

members of the community.

Resilient Communities: Lotherton
This Resilient Story comes from the folks at Village Bloggurls, 

a weekly girls' leadership and media production/literacy 

program housed at the North York Community House in 

Lotherton, a private development near Lawrence Heights. 

The film explores the resilience challenges and opportunities 

faced by the residents of this low-income community.

Building resilience through food security: 
Scadding Court 
This film features a series of short conversations with friends 

and staff of the Scadding Court Community Centre, as they 

discuss the meaning of resilience and the importance of more 

resilient food systems. 

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

27

#MyResilientStory Postcard Campaign 
The postcard campaign was another way we collected peoples’ stories of resilience, which yielded 
more than 200 responses from Torontonians from all walks of life. Here are two of the Resilient Story 
postcards:

28 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

 Being black is a struggle on a day to day to 

survive because there is so much stigma

attached to the colour of your skin and living in a 

neighbourhood that has been labeled as a

high risk neighborhood for things such as gun 

violence and poverty. As a mother of black

children, it is something that I have to live with 

every day knowing that my kids are been
stigmatized by police, the very people that 
should be protecting them, abusing them

because they have power, knowing that they will 

get away with it because they are

in control and the system will back them.

- KINGSTON-GALLOWAY-ORTON PARK RESIDENT

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

29

A Global Resilience Movement

With the development of its first ever Resilience Strategy, Toronto joins a community of cities spanning 
the globe that are putting resilience at the centre of their efforts to plan for the physical, social, and 
economic challenges of the 21st century. Established in 2013 by the Rockefeller Foundation, 100 
Resilient Cities (100RC) supports a view of resilience that includes not just the shocks – like heatwaves, 
floods, and power outages – but also the stresses that weaken the fabric of a city on a day-to-day basis. 

Since 2013, the 100RC network grew to span 97 cities in over 50 countries, across 6 continents and 21 
languages. By joining the global network, Toronto gained access to an active community of practice that 
included over 17,000 members, allowing the city to move to the forefront of a movement that will come 
to define the 21st century. The network has enabled cities to leverage more than $4.5 billion in new 
funding from the public, private, and not-for-profit sectors and successfully catalyzed culture change in 
local governance.

NEW ORLEANS
Resilient New Orleans won the 2016 
American Planning Association award 
for excellence for its approach to 
addressing social equity in conjunction 
with environmental issues and disaster 
preparedness.

LOS ANGELES
Los Angeles has embedded resilience as 
a value that guides municipal planning 
across all of city government. The 
appointment of over 30 Departmental 
Chief Resilience Officers has created an 
in-City network of resilience practitioners 
to advance initiatives.

30 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

Toronto joined the 100RC network in 2016, and through its participation is committed to 
demonstrating global leadership in resilience while responding to the conditions that make 
Toronto unique. Here are some of the more notable initiatives to come out of the 100RC 
network:

NORFOLK
Norfolk, VA leveraged its Resilience 
Strategy for over $100 million in external 
investment, including the largest grant 
in the City’s history for flood protection 
infrastructure.

ATHENS
Athens created a philanthropic partnership 
which has benefitted over 100,000 residents  
through poverty alleviation, health, education, 
and community development projects.

WELLINGTON
In Wellington, New Zealand, a 
city prone to earthquakes, tidal 
flooding, and storm surge, the 
City has prioritized funding and 
implementation of resilience-
building projects to ensure 
residents have access to a 
secure water supply.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

31

CAPE TOWN
Cape Town’s strategy process included 
over 150 experts and 11,000 residents to 
combat ‘Day Zero,’ when the city could run 
dry of water, including prioritizing eight 
solutions to address the root causes of 
Cape Town’s water insecurity.

STRATEGY 
PROCESS

03

STRATEGY    
     PROCESS

2015

TORONTO 
APPLIES TO 

100RC

2016

TORONTO 
ACCEPTED  
TO 100RC

citing flooding and 

heatwaves as shocks, and 
inequities and housing as 

stresses.

 

R
E
B
M
E
C
E
D

AGENDA 
SETTING 

WORKSHOP 

 

which highlights:

•  equity, climate change, transit, and housing 

are top of mind concerns for participants;

•  Toronto’s strategy needs to be informed by 

lived experience and integrate the voices and 

perspectives of diverse stakeholders; and
there is need for greater integration and 

• 
collaboration between and across all sectors 

that typically operate in silos.

VISION AND PRINCIPLES 
WORKSHOP, SEPTEMBER 2018

THE AGENDA SETTING WORKSHOP 
WAS HELD IN DECEMBER 2016 
AND WAS ATTENDED BY 120+ 
SENIOR CITY STAFF AND OTHER 
STAKEHOLDERS, INCLUDING MAYOR 
JOHN TORY.

32 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

R
E
B
M
E
C
E
D

R
E
B
M
E
T
P
E
S

T
S
U
G
U
A

Y
L
U
J

Y
A
M

H
C
R
A
M

Y
R
A
U
N
A
J

Resilient 
Action 

Workshop

Vision 

and Principles 

workshops

Telephone 
Town Hall

Urban 
Flooding 
Workshop 

Launch 
of public 

engagement 

15 teams 
mobilized 

Our final workshop involves over 100 
stakeholders and members of the 
public to identify potential actions for 
the Strategy

Held in collaboration with OCAD using 
a Strategic Foresight process and 
includes over 100 stakeholders and 
senior City staff

Toronto’s first ever Telephone Town 
Hall engages over 6,000 residents 
across the city

3-day workshop with the Urban 
Flooding Working Group, senior 
management, and other stakeholders 
in collaboration with Dutch flooding 
experts Deltares

The 2nd installation of the CUI 
Placemakers event series kicks off the 
second phase of the process at the 
Toronto Reference Library

Scope of work approved, teams 
mobilize to support strategy 
development

Resilient 

Neigbourhoods 

Project

Launch of a collaboration with the 
Toronto Foundation that involves 10 
Resilience Hubs across the city and 
70+ next generation philanthropists

2018

STRATEGY 

DEVELOPMENT

THE KICKOFF TO OUR SECOND PHASE OF 
WORK WAS HELD IN COLLABORATION 
WITH THE CANADIAN URBAN INSTITUTE 
AND THE TORONTO PUBLIC LIBRARY AND 
HIGHLIGHTED STORIES OF RESILIENCE, 
DECEMBER 2018

The Institute on Municipal 
Finance & Governance (IMFG) 
hosted ‘What is a Resilient 
City’ with Chief Resilience 
Officers from New York and 
Montreal

Kick off of the Canadian 
Urban Institute (CUI) 
Placemakers event series

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

33

VISION AND PRINCIPLES 
WORKSHOP, SEPTEMBER 2018

2017

PRELIMINARY 
RESILIENCE 
ASSESSMENT

 

The first deliverable in the 

100RC process focuses on two 

discovery areas: 

•  neighbourhood resilience

•  climate resilience

CHIEF 

RESILIENCE 

OFFICER 
HIRED

EVENT AT 

IMFG

E
N
U
J

R
E
B
M
E
T
P
E
S

CUI 

PLACEMAKERS 

EVENT

Resilience in Action

Toronto’s Resilience Strategy builds on a wealth of existing and planned 
efforts to make Toronto’s people and neighbourhoods, built environment, and 
decision-making processes more resilient. These are some of the City’s existing resilience 
strategies and programs. While most tackle many of Toronto’s resilience challenges, each one is associated 
with the challenge on which it has the biggest impact. The Resilience Strategy delivers where there are 
gaps in these plans, brings a resilience lens to some of the existing work, and intends to shape future plans 
coming to Toronto in the coming years.

TO Prosperity: Toronto Poverty Reduction Strategy
TO Prosperity is a concrete, 20-year plan that was unanimously approved 
by City Council in 2015 to make Toronto a city with opportunities for all by 
2035. Like the Resilience Strategy, it identifies worrying trends that show 
that income disparities have grown significantly over the last 50 years 
and makes the case that we cannot be a prosperous city with one in five 
adults and one in four children living in poverty. An updated Action Plan 
will be presented in 2019.

The Toronto Food Strategy
Food plays a powerful role in promoting health, as well as building strong and diverse 
communities, protecting the environment, and strengthening the economy. The Toronto 
Food Strategy, led by Toronto Public Health, aims to move the needle towards a 
sustainable food system that positively impacts human and environmental health. It aligns 
with the growing international, national, and regional food movements and the increasing 
recognition of the important role of cities in promoting healthy, sustainable food systems. 
These movements are a response to a food system that creates deep inequities, and 
threatens the health and environment of communities around the world. The Toronto 
Food Strategy uses a multi-sectoral approach to build capacity internally at the City level 
and to facilitate collaboration with external partners to accomplish change.

53% 
buildings

Toronto’s 

Greenhouse 
Gas Emissions

2014

11% 
waste

35% 

transportation

TransformTO: Climate Action for the Healthy, Prosperous Toronto
TransformTO is Toronto’s climate action strategy to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions by 80% by 2050. TransformTO will reduce 
local greenhouse gas emissions, improve our health, grow our 
economy, and improve social equity. The Resilience Strategy makes 
recommendations to integrate climate resilience into TransformTO’s 
existing short- and long-term strategies in the 2020 to 2023 action plan 
being delivered in 2019.

34 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

MANY RECENT AND 
ONGOING PLANNING 
EFFORTS CUT 
ACROSS MORE THAN 
ONE RESILIENCE 
CHALLENGE

NEW IN 
2019/2020

UPDATE IN 
2019/2020

MOBILITY

EQUITY

HOUSING

COMMUNITIES AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

CIVIC 

ENGAGEMENT

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

35

Building Momentum Across 
the Region

This Strategy is also influenced by work going on outside the City government. Community groups, non-profit 
organizations, and industry leaders are doing work to better understand Toronto’s resilience and take action 
to strengthen it. This is just some of the leading resilience work going on across the region, organized by the 
Strategy’s three focus areas.

RESIDENTS SHOWING 
THEIR SUPPORT, PHOTO BY 
TORONTO STAR

TORONTO FOUNDATION

The Neighbourhood Resilience 
Project supported ten resilience 
hubs across the city to harness 
local residents to design resilience 
projects in their communities, 
funded by more than 90 Millennial 
and Gen X philanthropists. Learn 
more on page 14 or visit https://
torontofoundation.ca/vision2020/

TORONTO FOUNDATION

The #TorontoStrong fund was 
created to distribute the generous 
outpouring of over $4 million 
donated to support the 41 victims 
and families of the 2018 Yonge 
Street van attack and Danforth 
shooting.

TORONTO & REGION CONSERVATION 
AUTHORITY

The Sustainable Neighbourhood 
Action Program (SNAP) aims to 
accelerate the implementation of 
environmental improvements and 
renewal at the neighbourhood scale 
in older urban areas. It takes an 
integrated approach to overcome 
urban retrofit challenges and 
address a broad range of objectives 
with locally tailored solutions.

36 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

YMCA OF GREATER TORONTO

The YMCA is working to ensure 
their existing and new Centres of 
Community (health and fitness 
centres) are resilient safe havens 
for the public in the event of 
extended power outages or other 
emergencies (more on page 152).

BUILDING OPERATORS AND 
MANAGERS ASSOCIATION TORONTO

BOMA Toronto released a Technical 
Guidance Note to help owners 
and managers of commercial real 
estate in Toronto consider resilience 
and the potential risks imposed by 
extreme weather. 

CUI PLACEMAKERS EVENT, 
HELD IN SEPTEMBER 2017

FUTURE CITIES SUMMIT, 
NOVEMBER 2018

EVERGREEN

Evergreen launched Future Cities 
Canada, a collaborative platform 
for accelerating innovation to build 
regenerative, inclusive cities of the 
future, supported by the McConnell 
Foundation, TD Bank, Maison de 
l’innovation sociale, and Community 
Foundations of Canada. 

CANADIAN URBAN INSTITUTE (CUI)

The CUI held the Placemakers 
speaker series to allow for informed, 
high-quality conversation among 
residents and city-builders about 
solutions for the built environment 
that balance human, ecological, and 
economic impacts. 

WELLESLEY INSTITUTE

The Wellesley Institute asked “what 
does it cost to Thrive in the GTA?” 
and created the Thriving in the City 
framework to defines individuals’ 
needs across physical, mental, 
social, and economic dimensions of 
health and well-being. Learn more 
at https://www.wellesleyinstitute.
com/publications/thriving-in-the-
city-what-does-it-cost/

LEGEND

PEOPLE AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

INFRASTRUCTURE

LEADING A RESILIENT CITY

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

The School of Cities, founded in 
2018, convenes urban-focused 
researchers, educators, students, 
practitioners, and the general public 
to explore how to make cities more 
sustainable, prosperous, inclusive, 
and just. 

UNITED WAY OF GREATER TORONTO

The Strengthening Community 
Assets and Local Economies 
(SCALE) Lab in 2018 explored ideas 
to build inclusive local economies in 
the inner suburbs. 

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

37

Engagement and Research

ONLINE SURVEY 
Asking about resilience challenges 
and future trends

IDEATION 
What events in Toronto’s past 
shaped its resilience story? 
(more on pages 48-49)

MAPPING 
Understanding Toronto’s 
resilience landscape

LOCAL CHAMPIONS
in communities across Toronto

TOOLKIT 
Designed in collaboration with 
Local Champions

We have engaged 

over 8,000 

Torontonians so far in 
conversations about 
resilience in a variety 

of ways.

WORKSHOPS AND 
OPEN HOUSES 
Consultations with 
residents and stakeholders

STORIES 
What can we learn from how 
Torontonians experience 
resilience?

LIBRARIES 
Resilience displays and other 
activities in 30 libraries across the city

VISION AND PRINCIPLES 
WORKSHOP, SEPTEMBER 2018

MICRO-GRANTS 
Micro-grants to film seven resilience 
stories (more on pages 26-27)

TELEPHONE TOWN HALL 
Radio show-style event to 
drive participation

38 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

“This broad consultation could turn into 
inspiring action with residents.” 

– FROM THE VISION AND PRINCIPLES WORKSHOP IN 
SEPTEMBER 2018

400+

workshop participants

174,573

social media impressions

26,216+

social media engagements

8,00O+

total participants

250+

resilient conversations

6,360+

town hall participants

900+

survey responses

8

working groups

MISSISSAUGA OF CREDIT RIVER ELDER 
GARRY SAULT AT THE WAR OF 1812 
COMMEMORATION EVENT AT FORK YORK

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

39

Engaging in Conversations 
across Toronto

Exploring Toronto’s resilience poses a challenge: in a city of over 2.9 million, how do we 
harness and integrate diverse perspectives on resilience to prepare for the future? Our 
answer to this question led us in three directions, described below and mapped out on 
the right.  

BLACK CREEK 
COMMUNITY 
HEALTH CENTRE

REXDALE COMMUNITY 
HEALTH CENTRE

Resilience Conversations: Resident-designed 
consultation
We pushed the boundaries of participatory policy making by co-
designing an engagement process with residents. The Resilience 
Office co-developed a neighbourhood outreach plan with seven 
Local Champions, who led conversations in seven neighbourhoods 
(learn more on page 86). The Resilience Office also held an eighth 
conversation in Lawrence Heights. The conversations are mapped on 
the right. 

Fostering a civic dialogue
We focused on fostering a true civic dialogue. In addition to the 
Resilience Conversations, we held a Telephone Townhall and a series 
of events called the Placemakers Series. All of these events were 
focused on connecting residents with city leaders and thinkers to 
share ideas and build relationships. We focused on hearing from 
residents who have been historically underrepresented in City 
consultations. For example, we worked to ensure residents from 
across Toronto (not just downtown) could participate in the Telephone 
Town Hall, as mapped on the right. 

Neighbourhood Resilience Hubs
The Toronto Foundation’s Neighbourhood Resilience Project 
supported ten resilience hubs across the city. Each hub hosted a 
conversation with diverse local residents to design resilience projects 
in their communities. The projects were then supported financially by 
more than 90 of Toronto’s Millennial and Gen X philanthropists, who 
collectively pledged more than $500,000 to support the work. The 
resilience hubs are mapped on the right.

40 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

AGINCOURT COMMUNITY 
SERVICES ASSOCIATION

THORNCLIFFE 
NEIGHBOURHOOD OFFICE

NORTH YORK 
COMMUNITY HOUSE

AGINCOURT

MALVERN

MORNINGSIDE

LAWRENCE HEIGHTS

DORSET PARK

FLEMINGDON PARK

THORNCLIFFE PARK

EAST SCARBOROUGH 
STOREFRONT

BOYS AND GIRLS CLUB OF 
EAST SCARBOROUGH

REGENT PARK

NATIVE CHILD AND 
FAMILY SERVICES

SCADDING COURT 
COMMUNITY CENTRE

PARKDALE ACTIVITY 
RECREATION CENTRE

LEGEND

Neighbourhoods

Neighbourhoods with a Local Champion

Toronto Public Library branch with 
resilience week displays and/or activities

Toronto Neighbourhood Resilience Project 
Hub

Participants in Telephone Town Hall, 
organized by Postal Code geographies:

0

90 participants

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

41

Engagement in a Global 
Resilience Network

Through Toronto’s participation in a global resilience network, 
the City has connected with other cities across the country 
and around the world.  The City of Toronto has worked with 
more than 50 cities in this process to both learn from their 
experiences and share our lessons. Toronto’s partners in 
this process have included 100 Resilient Cities, C40, the 
Dutch Government, and other relationships developed 
through events such as the Global Resilience Summit 
in 2017.  The map highlights just a few examples of 
how Toronto has learned from and contributed to 
the global urban resilience movement.

Montreal, Vancouver, 
Calgary – The four Canadian cities 
(including Toronto) in the network have 
shared ideas and collaborated to build 
momentum nationally on resilience.  
We attended Montreal’s Strategy 
launch in June 2018, the first Resilience 
Strategy in Canada.

Los Angeles – LA 
participated in our ‘Emergency 
Management and Resilience’ 
study, and inspired our work 
with their actions to improve 
preparedness through 
community collaboration.

New York – New 
York hosted the 2017 
Global Resilience Summit, 
where we worked with 
more than 50 cities. New 
York also participated 
alongside Montreal in our 
‘What Makes a Resilient 
City’ event.

42 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

Manchester – Manchester, along with 
Paris, Melbourne, and Boston, supported Toronto 
with lessons learned for the establishment of the 
TorontoStrong Fund.

Rotterdam – Toronto participated in the 
C40 Adaptation Academy, hosted by the City of 
Rotterdam. We integrated the lessons from the 
Academy into our climate resilience work. We 
studied Rotterdam’s experience closely in the 
development of our urban flooding actions.

Boston – We participated in 
an exchange with 8 cities on the 
relationship between equity and 
resilience, hosted by Boston. Boston 
placed racial equity at the centre of their 
Resilience Strategy, which inspired our 
approach to equity and resilience.

Milan – We participated in an 
exchange with 8 cities on nature-based 
solutions, hosted by Milan. Milan has 
an ambitious suite of green and blue 
infrastructure initiatives. We applied 
the lessons from the Milan exchange 
to our actions on green and blue 
infrastructure.

Melbourne – We 
worked closely with 
Melbourne to understand 
their Community Resilience 
Framework, which inspired 
our actions on resilience at 
the neighbourhood level.

USING PLAYING CARDS WITH INTERNATIONAL 
PRECEDENTS TO SPARK DISCUSSIONS ON 
TORONTO’S OPPORTUNITIES RESILIENT ACTIONS 
WORKSHOP, DECEMBER 2018

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

43

Breaking Down Silos 
through Partnership

Building resilience is fundamentally about creating and 
expanding partnerships. To find and implement solutions 
to Toronto’s biggest challenges, we must partner across 
City divisions, silos, disciplines, and sectors. This image 
maps out the partnerships the Resilience Office made 
with 82 organizations to deliver 19 projects as part of 
creating the Resilience Strategy.

We worked with:

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

27 City divisions, agencies, boards, and corporations

33 non-profit organizations

13 companies 

5 universities

4 non-City of Toronto government bodies

We used this map to look around the room, ask “who 
is not here”, and invite them to be a part of discussions, 
plans, and projects on resilience. We challenge resilience 
leaders across Toronto to do the same.

LEGEND

44 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

45

RESILIENCE 
IN TORONTO

04RESILIENCE IN 

Toronto Today

TORONTO

2.9 MILLION 

People Live in Toronto (July 2017)

2ND Largest Financial Centre 

in North America

100  Public Library Branches, 

one of the world’s 
busiest library systems

3RD

 

Largest Tech Hub 
in North America

5 World Renowned 

Universities

4TH Largest City in North 

America

17% of Toronto’s land area is 

made up of ravines

DATA RETRIEVED FROM VARIOUS CITY OF TORONTO REPORTS, TORONTO PUBLIC LIBRARY, AND TORONTO GLOBAL.

46 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

70,000 

Indigenous peoples live 

in Toronto

51.2% 

of the population was 
born outside of Canada

42% 

of Indigenous adults 
in Toronto speak an 
Indigenous language

51.5% 

of the population identify 

as a visible minority

DATA RETRIEVED FROM INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS OFFICE (CITY OF TORONTO); 
“OUR HEALTH COUNTS TORONTO” SURVEY (2018); “2016 CENSUS: 
HOUSING, IMMIGRATION AND ETHNOCULTURAL DIVERSITY, ABORIGINAL 
PEOPLES BACKGROUNDER

 

 

Buildings Under Construction or Planned

It was summer of 1995 when we 
came to Canada. I had no idea what 
challenges we were going to face. 
After a week, I started to feel culture 
shock. That was the first time I 
encountered different cultures. It was 
very strange for me to meet or see 
different faces and nationalities.

TORONTO

CHICAGO

LOS ANGELES

SAN FRANCISCO

10 BUILDINGS UNDER 
CONSTRUCTION

10 BUILDINGS PLANNED

ROUNDED TO NEAREST 10; DATA 
FROM EMPORIS.COM AND INCLUDES 
ALL BUILDINGS 

In 2018, Toronto had 
212 buildings under 
construction, with an 
additional 519 buildings 
planned.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

47

Toronto’s Resilience Story

We can learn a lot about our city’s approach to building resilience from our past. In creating this 
Strategy, we asked residents, stakeholders and partners to share moments in Toronto’s history 
that have contributed to its resilience. Here is some of what we heard. 

GREAT FIRES

AFTER THE GREAT FIRE, 
WELLINGTON STREET

HURRICANE HAZEL

DESTRUCTION CAUSED 
BY HURRICANE HAZEL

BATH HOUSE RAIDS

TORONTO STAR COVER STORY ON THE BATH HOUSE RAIDS

SARS

TORONTO PURCHASE

19 
04

19 
54

19
81

20
03

20
10

48 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

“In 1904, a fire destroyed most of Downtown Toronto, sparking new requirements for fire-resistant buildings.”“The Toronto Police raided four city bathhouses and arrested more than 250 gay men. The significant community response resulted in the first Pride Parade and a City inquiry into the actions of the police.”“Hurricane Hazel blew through Canada on October 15, 1954, causing 81 deaths and over $1 billion in damage. In the aftermath, the region fundamentally changed how it planned for flooding, including expropriating flooded lands for use as park lands.”“My son was supposed to be delivered at North York General Hospital, but it was closed due to the outbreak…I went to a different hospital and had to enter a big white tent to be assessed before entering. Every mom of a “SARS baby” born in spring 2003 has a story…but our inconveniences were nothing compared to what the front line workers and those that were inflicted with SARS faced.”“In 1787, the British Crown and the Mississaugas of the Credit River met to arrange the purchase, exchanging 250,808 acres of land that became most of today’s Toronto and York Region for money and other items. The agreement was in dispute for over 200 years, culminating in a historic 2010 decision in which Canada agreed to pay $145 million for the lands.”INDIGENOUS RESILIENCE AND 
TORONTO AS A MEETING PLACE*

INDIGENOUS 
FLAGS AT CITY 
HALL

* DEVELOPED BASED ON JOHNSON, JON (2013). THE INDIGENOUS 
ENVIRONMENTAL HISTORY OF TORONTO, “THE MEETING PLACE”. 

BLOOR VIADUCT

CARIBANA

YONGE STREET UPRISING

S
R
A
E
Y
 
0
0
0
,
1
1
 
R
E
V
O

19 
18

19 
67

19
92

20
03

BLACKOUT

1967 EXCERPT FROM THE GLOBE AND MAIL, SPOTLIGHT 
ON THE FIRST CARIBANA FESTIVAL

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

49

“The Bloor Street Viaduct was built with the capacity to hold a subway decades before Toronto had a subway…this was infrastructure with a long term vision.”“The festival was introduced to Canada by immigrants from the Caribbean. Following a Carnival format, this event is very important for preserving and expressing our Caribbean identity.”“The infamous northeast blackout of 2003 left 10 million people without power in Ontario.”“On May 4, 1992, following the acquittal of an off-duty white police officer who shot and killed 22-year-old Black man Raymond Lawrence, the Black Action Defence Committee took to Yonge St. for a peaceful protest. Homeless youth, Indigenous youth, other minorities as well as white allies joined in. The event brought to light the Black communities’ struggles against anti-black racism in Toronto.”The Toronto area is the traditional territory of many  First Nations, including the Mississaugas of the Credit, the Anishnabeg, the Chippewa, the Haudenosaunee and the Wendat peoples, and was inhabited for at least 11,000 years. Long before European contact, the Humber River was one part of a major portage route, the  Toronto Carrying Place Trail, and was one of the fastest inland routes through what is now southern Ontario. This made the portage a very important and desirable area for meeting, trading and exchanging information and ideas. It was a place where many Indigenous communities likely met to discuss solutions to the resilience challenges of their time.Toronto’s Resilience Challenges

The six resilience challenges 
represent Toronto’s most pressing 
issues affecting our resilience, and 
the most significant opportunities 
for improving resilience. 

They came from extensive public and stakeholder 
engagement that began, through the Preliminary 
Resilience Assessment with identifying ten acute 
shocks and chronic stresses that currently affect 
Toronto’s resilience the most: flooding, heatwaves, 
blizzards and cold snaps, power outages, 
emergency preparedness, poverty and inequities, 
access to housing, ageing infrastructure, getting 
around, and long-term municipal financial 
stability. 

In the next phase of the consultation process, 
residents told us which of these challenges 
affected them the most, and identified additional 

trends and challenges that affect their resilience. 
This culminated in a half-day stakeholder 
workshop that collected hundreds of additional 
inputs. In total, residents brought forward 155 
issues through the consultation process that 
influence lives in Toronto right now, from the cost 
of education to homelessness, data privacy, and 
Indigenous rights.

We categorized these 155 issues into 16 themes 
and ranked them by intensity, a measure of how 
important each was to participants in our online 
survey, how many times they came up at our 
stakeholder workshop, and how long participants 
spoke about them. The six highest-intensity 
themes were then refined through further public 
consultation at an Open House in December 2018. 
The six resilience priorities inform the Vision and 
Principles of the Strategy, as well as the Focus 
Areas and Actions. 

EQUITY

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

CIVIC ENGAGEMENT

COMMUNITIES AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

HOUSING

MOBILITY

50 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

Resilience 
challenges describe 
Toronto’s resilience 
context

The community-led 
vision articulates 
our aspirations for a 
resilient Toronto

The Strategy is 
organized into 
three focus areas to 
achieve our vision

EQUITY

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

CIVIC 

ENGAGEMENT

COMMUNITY AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

HOUSING

MOBILITY

VISION

PEOPLE AND 

NEIGHBOURHOODS

INFRASTRUCTURE

LEADING A 

RESILIENT CITY

including 3 priority 
actions in Focus Area 
A, and 1 priority action 
in Focus Area B

3 GOALS

3 GOALS

4 GOALS

5 ACTIONS

12 ACTIONS

10 ACTIONS

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

51

ABCEquity

This challenge is about a fairer and more just Toronto that ensures equitable life outcomes 
for all residents, through the policies we advance and the increased access and shared 
prosperity they promote, and the ways we make space for racialized, newcomer, queer, and 
Indigenous residents to substantively shape and direct the City’s future.

WHAT WE WANT TO CHANGE
Unequal access to resources, 
funding and opportunities, 
polarized ideologies, and lack of 
awareness of vulnerability.

WHERE WE WANT TO BE
People have access to the things they need to thrive. Communities 
have greater ownership over decision-making that affects them, 
including the way resources are distributed. There is broad empathy and 
understanding. Deliberate efforts are being made towards reconciliation.

  Ethno-cultural Segregation in Toronto

Over the past 50 years, segregation in Toronto by race and income has 
worsened, even as diversity has increased. Torontonians of different backgrounds are 
increasingly not living side by side and Toronto’s non-White residents are disproportionately 
concentrated in low-income neighbourhoods, as shown in the graphs below.

6
1
0
2

19%

9%

OVERALL 

CITY

49%

11%

13%

31%

23%

13%

13%

19%

16%

5%

10%

7%

61%

11%

3%

8%
4%

73%

LOW INCOME 

NEIGHBOURHOODS

MIDDLE INCOME 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

HIGH INCOME 

NEIGHBOURHOODS

We need to ask… how healing from 
intergenerational traumas is a necessary 
aspect of reintegrating how we live with 
everything around us.

– FROM THE INDIGENOUS CLIMATE ACTION REPORT ON 
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE AND CLIMATE ACTION (2018)

52 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

WHITE

BLACK

SOUTH ASIAN

CHINESE

OTHER

NOTE: THIS ANALYSIS IS BASED ON DATA FROM THE SELF-REPORTED 
“POPULATION GROUP” QUESTION IN THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA 
2016 CENSUS (QUESTION 19 AT HTTPS://WWW12.STATCAN.GC.CA/
CENSUS-RECENSEMENT/2016/REF/DICT/POP127-ENG.CFM). THE 
“OTHER” CATEGORY PRESENTED IN THE PIE CHARTS INCLUDES OTHER 
POPULATION GROUPS THAT ARE CATEGORIZED BY STATISTICS CANADA 
AS VISIBLE MINORITY GROUPS.  THIS ANALYSIS DOES NOT INCLUDE 
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES.

2016 CENSUS, AVERAGE INDIVIDUAL INCOME, ANALYSIS COURTESY OF 
NEIGHBOURHOOD CHANGE RESEARCH PARTNERSHIP, UNIVERSITY OF 
TORONTO - DAVID HULCHANSKI AND RICHARD MAARANEN

Toronto residents don’t have 
equal opportunities to be 
healthy.

29% 

of Toronto children under the age 
of 18 live in low income families

If all income groups in Toronto 
had the same health status as 
the highest income group, there 
would be...

932  

fewer premature 
deaths per year

62,111  

fewer people living 
with diabetes 
between 2003 - 2012.

DATA RETRIEVED FROM “THE UNEQUAL CITY 
2015: INCOME AND HEALTH INEQUITIES IN 
TORONTO,”  – CITY OF TORONTO

As a single parent I am not able 
to save and have access to 
the same opportunities as high 
income earners...I rely on attending 
community events for support, to 
be with like-minded individuals who 
live in the same community, and 
who experience the same issues... I 
am interested in creating a program 
within my neighbourhood to deal 
with these challenges. 

- MALVERN RESIDENT

 

 

Income Segregation in Toronto

Income segregation by neighbourhood 
increased 56% from 1990 to 2015. Also, there 
are more low and high income neighbourhoods now 
in Toronto than there were in 1970 and fewer middle 
income neighbourhoods. High income neighbourhoods 
are earning a larger share of Toronto’s total income 
relative to their population size than in past.

HIGH INCOME (20% PLUS ABOVE AVERAGE)

MIDDLE INCOME (20% ABOVE TO 20% BELOW AVERAGE)

LOW INCOME (20% PLUS BELOW AVERAGE)

NOT AVAILABLE 

CENSUS TRACT BOUNDARIES

1970

2000

2015

1971, 2001, 2016 CENSUS, 
AVERAGE INDIVIDUAL INCOME,  
ANALYSIS COURTESY OF 
NEIGHBOURHOOD CHANGE 
RESEARCH PARTNERSHIP, 
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO 
- DAVID HULCHANSKI AND 
RICHARD MAARANEN

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

53

Climate and 
Environment

This challenge is about the use and protection of natural resources, preparedness from 
weather events, our values around the natural world, and our relationship with the natural 
and built environments.

WHAT WE WANT TO CHANGE
A short-term view of natural resources, 
consumption habits,  inconsistent 
sustainability efforts, and no clear plan 
to adapt to a changing climate. Climate 
change leaves the most vulnerable 
members of our society at the greatest 
risk of harm.

WHERE WE WANT TO BE
A connection to the environment, an understanding 
of our effects on the natural world, including our 
contributions to climate change. Coordinated, large scale 
climate mitigation and adaptation efforts. We work with 
the Indigenous community in Toronto to incorporate 
Indigenous worldviews into our approach to environment. 
We prioritize protection of the most vulnerable residents.

Toronto is getting HOTTER, WETTER, AND WILDER.

 

 

Toronto’s Future Weather: Past, Present, and Future

VERY HOT DAYS 
(+30°C) PER YEAR

ANNUAL 

PRECIPITATION 
(MILLIMETRES)

HEAVY 

PRECIPITATION DAYS  
(+20 MILLIMETRES)

RECENT PAST
1976-2005

IMMEDIATE FUTURE
2021-2050

NEAR FUTURE
2051-2080

12.2

days

30.7

days

54.9

days

786

mm

817

mm

854

mm

6.6

days

6.9

days

7.8

days

DATA FOR THE TORONTO MUNICIPALITY, RETRIEVED FROM THE 
CLIMATE ATLAS CAN BE ACCESSED AT HTTPS://CLIMATEATLAS.
CA/DATA/CITY/458/ANNUAL_PRECIP_2060_85

54 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

Last winter, the temperature was almost -23 degrees C. The water pipes had frozen and 
burst, making the water system shut down. This problem affected not only me, but all 
building residents. Suddenly, I had had an idea: I took a bucket to the balcony and filled 
it with snow and then put it on the stove to make water. Snow turns into water. After that I 
used this water for mopping, dish washing, and in the bathroom. There was a  functioning 
bathroom across the street in Target so many people went there to get water or use the 
bathroom… other people went to local mosque to get water…you can only imagine what 
the poor people had to face when going out in this freezing and terrible weather. This 
incident has had a lasting effect on me, and ever since, I keep a bottle or can of water 
always stored in the house.

- THORNCLIFFE PARK RESIDENT

Indigenous peoples have essential, far-reaching 
knowledge and practices that are missing today, 
grounded in the laws of the land and Natural and 
higher laws...the nature of the relationship [between 
the City and Indigenous communities] needs to change 
in relation to climate work, from one that still reflects 
colonial domination to one that moves into a process of 
collaboration. After all, climate and other environmental 
catastrophes are intimately related to colonialism

- FROM THE INDIGENOUS CLIMATE ACTION REPORT ON INDIGENOUS    
KNOWLEDGE AND CLIMATE ACTION, 2018. LEARN MORE ON PAGE 138, ACTION C 3.1

120 

 estimated deaths per year 

caused by extreme heat

16,000 

homes were without power due to a 

rain storm in August 2018

78% 

of Torontonians express 
concern about climate 
change affecting the city.

DATA RETRIEVED FROM THE “CITY-WIDE CLIMATE 
PERCEPTIONS STUDY,” PREPARED FOR THE CITY 
OF TORONTO, 2018

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

55

Civic Engagement

This challenge is about power and civic life: the things that influence the ways we make 
decisions, whose voices are included in decision-making, how we approach leadership, and 
people’s commitment to community. 

WHAT WE WANT TO CHANGE
A lack of diversity of those in power 
positions, inequity in decision-making 
power, and low levels of trust and civic 
engagement, both with government and 
within communities.

WHERE WE WANT TO BE
Diverse communities share common goals and see 
themselves in their elected representatives; there is 
increased engagement both within communities and in 
government decision-making, accountable and transparent 
leadership, and high levels of trust in government.

RESILIENT ACTIONS WORKSHOP, 
DECEMBER 2018

In 2013, City Planning administered a survey 
of Toronto residents to better understand who 
was attending their public meetings. 
The survey indicated that work needs 
to be done to better engage Toronto’s 
uniquely diverse communities.

  Understanding who attends public meetings & who is being reached

DATA RETRIEVED FROM CITY 
PLANNING SURVEY – 2013 (CITY 
OF TORONTO)

Owners

2.1x

more likely to have participated than renters

e
c
n
a
d
n
e
t
t

 

A
g
n
i
t
e
e
M
c

 

i
l

b
u
P

Age Groups

56 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

English speakers

2x

more likely to have participated than those 

who speak other languages at home

People over 55

3x

18-34 year olds

more likely to have participated than 

Race, class, gender – among a few – plague my capabilities daily.
 I cope by refusing to remain silent and trying to find ways with like-minded people to 
develop a community to regain a sense of empowerment. To find my purpose and share 
my story. The City needs to begin by looking at the individuals in positions of power. It 
goes beyond acknowledging. When racialized individuals do not see people like them in 
positions of power, we lose hope and our sense of self and well-being is compromised. 
We need to be granted the same opportunities and seen beyond our skin.

– TORONTO RESIDENT

Residents are divided as to whether they feel 
confident in their public service and City Councillors.

 

 

Confidence in Local institutions (%)

Neighbourhood 
Centres

Local Merchants / 
Business People

School System

Justice System / 
Courts

HIGH CONFIDENCE

MEDIUM CONFIDENCE

LOW CONFIDENCE

CANNOT SAY

Local Media

Local City 
Councillor

City Hall

59

56

50

48

41

39

38

 

  

  

 

 

   

        24

 

 

     

      

  8

10

     29

     

    11

     4

 27

       14

 9

         29

       17

   6

   33

     22

     4

 30

36

 22

 9

    21

   6

DATA RETRIEVED FROM TORONTO SOCIAL CAPITAL STUDY, 2018 – TORONTO FOUNDATION, 
ENVIRONICS INSTITUTE, TORONTO’S VITAL SIGNS

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

57

Communities and 
Neighbourhoods

This challenge is about the role that residents and neighbourhood networks play in shaping 
the city’s future:  Our ability to work together, collaborate, and coordinate in the face of 
challenges by building on local strengths and assets and aligning with the supports and 
partnerships. 

WHAT WE WANT TO CHANGE
A community that is not fully 
resourced or equitably integrated 
into the city. Certain communities and 
residents lack the supports necessary 
to thrive.  

WHERE WE WANT TO BE
Connected communities where people feel a sense of trust 
and belonging. Residents have a fair stake in shaping the future 
of their neighbourhoods and the city at large. Silos are broken 
down and organizations and government work alongside 
residents to address the diverse needs of neighbourhoods. 

 

 

Neighbourhood Conversations with Local Champions

“Resilience challenges are not just 
about inequality but also about political 
representation, the accountability 
of City systems, and spending on 
neighbourhoods.”

“Neighbourhood resilience should 
rely on local crisis intervention teams 
that have the capacity to intervene 
in the case of flooding as well as gun 
violence. Neighbourhood resilience can 
only be realized if local organizations 
hire residents of the neighbourhood at 
all levels because building resilience 
requires personal connection and 
around-the-clock commitment.”

KEY FINDINGS OF THE “RESILIENT CONVERSATIONS” SERIES COMPLETED IN THE SUMMER/FALL OF 2018

58 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

 

How Much Difference can People Working Together 
Make in Addressing Problems in your Community?

A big difference

 

 

 

  55

Some difference

Little or no 
difference

 
 
    8 

        33
 
 
 

  

Cannot say

  4

DATA RETRIEVED FROM TORONTO SOCIAL CAPITAL STUDY, 
2018 – TORONTO FOUNDATION, ENVIRONICS INSTITUTE, 
TORONTO’S VITAL SIGNS

We are on the outskirts and we feel like we 
always get everything last. We don't want to be 
forgotten. We need education for our children 
and adults. We need employment here. We all 
work downtown. Our travelling one way is an 
hour and half. We are travelling packed into 
unreliable transit cars and buses. Why aren't 
the same opportunities for salaried employees 
downtown here? Why aren't there good jobs 
nearby? A lot of [people] don't own vehicles 
and can't afford [them]. Ageism is a problem for 
employment opportunities. The younger people 
- all they want them for is volunteer hours or 
interns and they don't want to properly employ 
them. Once they hear Malvern it’s a block. I know 
someone that had to get a PO Box to get a job so 
the [employer] didn't know they lived in Malvern.

– SCARBOROUGH RESIDENT

FUN AT LEASIDE PARK, FROM THE SNAP 
AND SHARE 2014 PHOTO CONTEST, PHOTO 
BY YASMEEN (SEW MING) TIAN

My story is I live alone. Both my kids live 5,000 miles away. So it is important for me to stay 
healthy and connect with people in my neighbourhood. I do this by becoming a volunteer 
in my neighbourhood. As a result I have met and made connection with a group of people 
who support and empower me. I am always busy with community events and have no time 
to worry about loneliness and depression.

– KINGSTON-GALLOWAY RESIDENT

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

59

Housing

This challenge is about equity of access to housing, housing affordability, and the limits and 
opportunities for housing.

WHAT WE WANT TO CHANGE
Inequity of housing access and a lack of housing 
options that are affordable, leading to a very high cost 
of living, unsure futures, and homelessness. 

WHERE WE WANT TO BE
Diverse, creative housing solutions that 
ensure broad housing affordability, and an 
acknowledgement that housing is a human right.

Toronto is a city of renters and owners.

47%

RENT

53%

OWN

...Both are becoming out of reach 
for the average household.

It is increasingly difficult for people living 
in poverty to find a home.

1 in 3 

Over one in three Indigenous adults 
in Toronto were precariously housed 

or experiencing homelessness in 
2018, compared to 1 in 25 Canadian 

adults who have experienced 

homelessness or insecure housing 

in the past 5 years.

DATA FROM “OUR HEALTH COUNTS TORONTO 
REPORT, HOUSING AND MOBILITY,” 2018, WELL 
LIVING HOUSE

AVERAGE TORONTO MARKET 
RENT (1 BEDROOM)

ONTARIO WORKS SHELTER 
ALLOWANCE (SINGLE PERSON)

DATA RETRIEVED FROM CMHC HOUSING MARKET PORTAL (2019) AND CITY OF 
TORONTO (2018).

60 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

I have rented a room for 3 years since I came to Canada in 
2015. There are always lots of troubles while sharing housing 
with others. I have almost adapted to it and am dreaming that 
someday I can afford a house of my own in Toronto. I am sure 
this is also many newcomers’ dream like me too.

– RIVERDALE RESIDENT

46.7% 

of tenant households (renters) 
were spending 30% or more of 
their income on shelter in 2016.

1.1% 

of private sector rental housing is 
vacant. A healthy vacancy rate is 
considered to be 3% or above.

19% 

of households are 

living in overcrowded 

conditions.

DATA FROM STATISTICS CANADA 
(2016), AS RETRIEVED FROM 
“HOUSING, IMMIGRATION AND 
ETHNOCULTURAL DIVERSITY, 
ABORIGINAL PEOPLES 
BACKGROUNDER”, CITY OF TORONTO; 
CANADIAN RENTAL HOUSING INDEX 
AND CMHC RENTAL MARKET SURVEY

 

 

Ownership costs as % of median household income

100

80

60

40

20

0
1986     1990     1994     1998     2002     2006     2010     2014     2018

SINGLE DETACHED

AGGREGATE

CONDO APARTMENT

AGGREGATE LONG TERM AVERAGE

DATA FROM RBC HOUSING TRENDS & AFFORDABILITY REPORT, SEPTEMBER 2018 

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

61

Mobility

This challenge is about how we move around the city, how we access transit, and the 
infrastructure that supports movement.

WHAT WE WANT TO CHANGE
Congestion, long commutes, and 
slow progress on transit  
and active transportation 
expansion.

WHERE WE WANT TO BE
Multiple reliable, affordable, accessible, and safe mobility options that 
reduce the amount of time it takes to get around. Redundancy and 
climate resilience increase reliability and reduce crowding; short trips 
are made by foot, bike, or transit, and we achieve Vision Zero.

 

 

Unequal access to mobility options

Neighbourhoods outside the city’s core are still heavily reliant on cars to get around, partly 
because they lack the mix of safe, reliable mobility options. At the same time, racialized 
and newcomer residents are increasingly concentrated in these same communities. They 
face longer commutes, and enjoy less access to jobs and services than other Torontonians, 
which impact their ability to truly thrive.

PERCENTAGE OF VISIBLE MINORITY, BY 
CENSUS TRACTS:

 

 

HIGH PERCENTAGE (75-100%)

ABOVE AVERAGE (52-74.9%)

2016 CENSUS, ANALYSIS COURTESY OF NEIGHBOURHOOD 
CHANGE RESEARCH PARTNERSHIP, UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO 
- DAVID HULCHANSKI AND RICHARD MAARANEN

62 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

 

 

Commuting – Main mode and duration

Black Torontonians are more likely to take transit to work and face 
longer commute times than average. 

Black Torontonians: 
Male

Black Torontonians:
Female

Total Population: 
Male

Total Population: 
Female

50 

31 

54 

37 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    3  4  1  40 

        3   5  1 59   

 

 

 

       

 

         3    8     3  30 

       

   6      1O    2  44 

 

 

 

 

 

       1 %

       1 %

       1 %

DRIVER

PASSENGER

WALK

BICYCLE

PUBLIC TRANSIT

       1 %

OTHER

28

29

27

24

25

15 15

16

12

9

< 15 min 

  15-29 min     30-44 min      45-59 min        60 min+

Commute duration

BLACK 
TORONTONIANS (%)

TOTAL 
POPULATION (%)

DATA RETRIEVED FROM STATISTICS CANADA: TARGET GROUP PROFILE 
OF VISIBLE MINORITY POPULATION

In Scarborough we have a lack of good 
transit. We have been promised a LRT 
network, which if it was built would connect 
Malvern to Scarborough especially for our 
young people who need better transit to 
bring jobs to our community. Our community 
is seen negatively throughout Toronto, so to 
improve all neighbourhoods in Toronto, we 
could have a neighbourhood [celebrated] a 
month, where different neighbourhoods in 
Toronto are highlighted. Get positive stories 
of each community over the year to connect 
to our neighbours.  That should be created 
so people can connect.

- MALVERN RESIDENT

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

63

AREAS05VISION

VISION, 
PRINCIPLES, 
AND FOCUS 

We developed the Vision through an 
extensive program of public and stakeholder 
consultation that began with a conversation 
with Torontonians about how they 
experienced resilience, both as individuals 
and as members of communities. These 
conversations informed an intense half-day 
workshop with stakeholders representing 
not-for-profit organizations, universities, 
charities, businesses, government agencies, 
and other City of Toronto Divisions, who 
were asked to work together to articulate 
Toronto’s resilience challenges as well as a 
desired future for the city in relation to its 
current state. 

These conversations led to the 
development of a Vision statement, 
which was then refined through further 
consultation with Torontonians. It is a shared 
community vision of what a truly resilient 
Toronto looks like, and its statements reflect 
the kinds of outcomes we hope to make 
progress towards through implementation 
of the Strategy’s Actions, combined with 
the actions of our partners, residents, and 
businesses. 

64 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

RESILIENT ACTIONS WORKSHOP HELD 
IN THE TORONTO REFERENCE LIBRARY, 
DECEMBER 10 2018

A place where residents feel empowered to help shape 
their communities and where government works in deep 
collaboration with the people it represents to advance an 
agenda of fairness and prosperity for everyone.

A place where we each feel connected to the natural world, and 
where we think about the now as well as far into the future.

Connected to long-term climate and sustainability practices 
that are embedded in how we do things, and allow us to adapt 
to an uncertain, changing climate.

Home. A place where housing is a right, and every resident has a 
safe, decent, and affordable place to live.

Where residents of Toronto will know the history of Indigenous 
people on these lands, past and present, and are committed 
to knowing about, understanding, and acting on Truth and 
Reconciliation, for themselves and the City as a whole. 

A place that creates space for diversity and recognizes every 
resident’s right to the city.

Easy to move around in, whether by foot, on a bicycle, in a car, 
or by transit, with multiple options that are efficient, safe, and 
affordable for every resident. 

A city of connected communities, where residents feel 
heard, share common goals, and have broad empathy and 
understanding for one another. 

A place that is led by brave and caring people who reflect the 
diversity of the communities they represent.

A place where every 
resident can
thrive

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

65

A SHARED, COMMUNITY VISION FOR A MORE RESILIENT TORONTO.ACTIONS

06ACTIONS

66 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

Resilience is complex and building a resilient city will take time. In this Strategy, action has been organized 
into three Focus Areas: People & Neighbourhoods, Infrastructure, and Leading a Resilient City. Each contains a 
series of Goals (all of which tie directly back to the Vision statement), and specific Actions, which are the specific 
projects required to realize each goal. The Actions outlined in the following pages are the most critical efforts 
Toronto must address to achieve resilience. These Actions represent realistic and practical aspirations, and are 
designed to realize co-benefits that build upon existing collaborations both within the City and with external 
partners.

PEOPLE AND 

NEIGHBOURHOODS

INFRASTRUCTURE

LEADING A 

RESILIENT CITY

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

67

ABCFOCUS AREA 

                  GOAL AND ACTIONS 

 

 

 

 

 

      

PEOPLE AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

A

List 
of All 
Actions

INFRASTRUCTURE

1.  Toronto has resilient, safe, affordable homes

1.1   PRIORITY ACTION: HOME RESILIENCE. Support homeowners 

1.2 

and renters to prepare their homes for shocks 
PRIORITY ACTION: VERTICAL RESILIENCE. Enable wide-scale 
change in apartment towers to improve resilience through the 
improvement or retrofit of apartment towers and units

1.3   Apply a resilience lens to the development of the new HousingTO 

2020-2030 Action Plan and ensure comprehensive action to 
address Toronto’s affordable housing gaps across the full spectrum 
of need

2.  Communities take action to improve resilience in their 

neighbourhoods

2.1   PRIORITY ACTION: NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE. Enhance 
the capacity of neighbourhoods to prepare for and recover from 
shocks through grassroots action and network building

3.  Poverty is eliminated and equity is improved

3.1 

Prioritize the implementation and resourcing of the Council-
approved Toronto Poverty Reduction Strategy

1.  Toronto is more resilient to climate change, including the hazards of 

flooding and heat

B

1.1 

1.2 

1.3 

1.4 
1.5 

1.6 

Institutionalize an integrated, resilience approach to flooding by 
adopting the Flood Resilient Toronto Charter
PRIORITY ACTION: FLOOD RESILIENCE: Centralize resources 
towards a city-wide flood planning and prioritization tool 
Review and update existing flood mitigation programs to account 
for resilience
Take action to mitigate the effects of extreme heat 
Communicate, synthesize and scale up ongoing City efforts to 
advance a system of green and blue infrastructure
Promote a sustainable and resilient food system 

2. 

Infrastructure and buildings are resilient to a changing climate and 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions 

2.1 

2.2 

2.3 

Develop a Resilience Lens and apply it to City investments, with a 
focus on infrastructure
Integrate resilience into development and land use planning 
processes
Incorporate climate resilience into the City’s asset management 
framework and plans

68 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

FOCUS AREA 

                  GOAL AND ACTIONS 

 

 

 

 

 

      

INFRASTRUCTURE

3.  Toronto has multiple reliable, affordable, and safe mobility options 

that reduce the amount of time it takes to get around

LEADING A 
RESILIENT CITY

decision-making

2.1  

resilienceC

3.1 

4. 

3. 

3.1 

Create a city-wide mobility action plan through synthesis of 
ongoing mobility initiatives and priorities, and identification of 
resilience gaps

3.2  Continue to prioritize service and capital improvements to the TTC 

that make the system safer, more affordable, more reliable, and 
less crowded

3.3  Move more people more efficiently within the existing rights of way 

by expanding demonstration projects

1.  Civic engagement and trust in the City improve, and leadership 

better reflects Toronto’s diversity

1.1 

1.2 

Expand corporate civic engagement supports to improve 
engagement outcomes at the City
Increase transparency and prioritize communications to improve 
trust in local government

2.  The City prioritizes the most vulnerable people and highest risk in 

Integrate equity into the City’s strategic planning processes

Indigenous communities have a leadership role in building resilience 

Build relationships with Indigenous communities in Toronto around 

Institutionalize resilience into the City’s decision-making and take 
leadership on resilience

4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4  
4.5 

4.6 

Embed resilience as a practice across the City and partners
Integrate climate resilience into TransformTO
Integrate resilience into emergency management
Improve risk management and communication to residents
Support local partners in academia, industry, and community to 
take leadership on resilience 
Position Toronto as a regional, national, and international leader on 
resilience

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

69

FOCUS AREA A:
PEOPLE AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

People and 
Neighbourhoods

This area focuses on supporting residents, businesses, 
and communities to make Toronto’s neighbourhoods more 
resilient. It includes a focus on supporting Torontonians at 
home and in their neighbourhoods.

“For me, it’s just providing a 
nurturing environment where 
they can thrive. And I think 
that’s all the kids in Parkdale 
need, is a place to thrive.” 

– MIRANDA KAMAL, MJKO

KIDS PRACTICING BOXING WITH 
MIRANDA KAMAL AT MJKO

70 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

GOAL A1: 
Toronto has resilient, safe, 
affordable homes

Torontonians’ resilience to shocks is fundamentally tied to the place they call home. This goal 
supports owners and renters to make changes to their homes that improve resilience. The goal is 
also about the relationship between resilience and affordability.

Toronto is a growing, successful, and prosperous city, and yet over the last decade residents’ housing 
options have become increasingly restricted. This lack of available and affordable housing has a 
negative effect on both residents and the city’s economic vitality. By 2041, the Province anticipates 
that Toronto will add nearly half a million more residents. That’s half a million more people who will 
need to be housed, which will only add to current affordability challenges if immediate action is not 
taken. Further, there is increasing demand for shelter space, meaning that the shelter system would be 
challenged by a sudden increases in users, caused by a cold snap or other similar shock. 

Resilient, safe and affordable homes are a key prerequisite for access to employment, shelter during 
extreme weather, health, and community safety. Considering housing issues through an equity lens, 
the future resilience rests on the ability to maintain existing and provide new affordable and supportive 
housing options to everyone, especially seniors, low-income singles and families, persons with 
disabilities, the homeless, and other groups that will struggle to find and maintain stable, affordable 
housing. 

ACTIONS
1.1   Support homeowners and renters to prepare their homes for shocks 
1.2 

Enable wide-scale change in apartment towers to improve resilience through 
the improvement or retrofit of apartment towers and units

13   Apply a resilience lens to the development of the new HousingTO 2020-2030 
Action Plan and ensure comprehensive action to address Toronto’s affordable 
housing gaps across the full spectrum of need

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

71

ACTION A1.1
PRIORITY ACTION:  
HOME RESILIENCE

Support homeowners and renters to 
prepare their homes for shocks

THE CHALLENGE
There are over 400,000 detached, semi-detached and row houses 
occupied in Toronto. These homes are exposed to climate shocks, 
including the impacts of extreme cold (i.e. frozen pipes), wind, 
extreme heat, and flooding. Most of these shocks are also likely to 
be accompanied by a power failure. Housing quality, and specifically 
the ability to shelter in place, is a major factor in how residents fare 
during shocks. 

In many cases, the costs associated with recovering from these 
shocks can be considerable. For example, for basement flooding: 
•  The average costs of a flooded basement in Canada is $43,000;
•  Recent evidence shows the mental health costs of flooding can 

• 

persist for more than three years for a flooded household; 
In half of the cases studied in Ontario, one member of 
households affected by a flooded basement took an average of 
seven days off work as a result; 

•  Repeated basement flooding can result in the un-insurability of 

homes or mortgages, and diminished property values; and

•  Basement residents are more likely to be renters, lower-income, 

and uninsured, and are therefore the most vulnerable to 
flooding and likely to suffer the most. 

THE ACTION
The Resilience Office has already begun to take action to support 
homeowners and renters to make their homes more resilient. In 
the summer of 2018, the Office coordinated a partnership between 
the City of Toronto, the Insurance Bureau of Canada, and the Intact 
Centre on Climate Change Adaptation at the University of Waterloo 
to deliver the Home Resilience Pilot. The pilot was delivered at no 
financial cost to the City and supported 168 homeowners to better 
understand and protect themselves from flood risk, and to be better 

72 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

HOUSING

EQUITY

 
BENEFITS
Toronto’s homes, especially 
those of its most vulnerable 
residents, are more resilient to 
flooding, freezing, and other 
hazards, resulting in fewer costs to 
Torontonians after a shock 

LEAD
•  Resilience Office (City of Toronto)

KEY PARTNERS
•  Toronto Water (City of Toronto) 
•  Office of Emergency 

Management and Toronto Fire 
Services (City of Toronto) 

•  Strategic Communications (City 

of Toronto)

•  Municipal Licensing and 

Standards (City of Toronto)
•  Waterloo Intact Centre on 

Climate Adaptation 

•  Insurance Bureau of Canada

FUNDING
Seeking partnerships, such as with 
the insurance sector, to provide 
financial incentives or subsidies. 
Aim to leverage policy changes 
and financial incentives planned 
by the Province.

prepared for emergencies. Participating residents 
received emergency preparedness resources 
and a professional service provider conducted 
a 50-point visual Home Flood Protection 
Assessment that identified priority actions to 
reduce basement flood risk. 

A follow up survey showed 90% of participants 
were ‘extremely’ or ‘very’ satisfied with the pilot; 
over 80% took action to protect their homes 
from flood risk; and the vast majority of actions 
taken were simple, low cost, and completed 
by homeowners themselves or with the help of 
friends and family.

The pilot built on the success of Toronto’s 
Basement Flooding Protection Program, which 
offers subsidies and information for homeowners 
to take actions which reduce their flood risk. 
It was also informed by the experience of the 
Home Energy Loan Program, which supports 
homeowners to pay for the cost of home energy 
improvements over time.

In order to further support homeowners and 
renters to take resilience action at home, the City 
will build on and scale up the success of the Home 
Resilience Pilot. This will require:
•  Expanding the scope of the assessment so 
that it addresses a more holistic set of risks, 
including extreme heat, cold/freezing, and 
power failures; 

•  Creating a free, online version of the 

assessment; 

•  Partnering with the insurance sector and 

others to provide limited subsidized home 
assessments to either homes that have been 
flooded and/or homes with basement tenants; 
•  Continuing to engage the Province to support 

implementation of the project, such as 
through its Made in Ontario Environment Plan.  
For example, the Province could providing 
incentives to home owners who complete a 
home assessment and implement changes in 

their homes; and

•  Partnering with the insurance sector or 
other partners to launch a coordinated 
communications campaign to explain the 
benefits of home resilience to residents, to 
improve uptake of both the free online and 
subsidized home assessments.

After scaling up, the project will be evaluated and 
re-planned accordingly, with a focus on: 
• 

Improving uptake, data/monitoring, and 
targeting of the program to vulnerable groups; 
Investigating opportunities for further scaling 
the assessments to include apartment or 
condominium assessments; 
Integrating the Home Energy Loan Program, 
or other City services to provide a one-window 
approach for homeowners to take climate 
action; and 
Improving customer service by synthesizing 
messaging and programs related to home 
resilience. 

• 

• 

• 

EQUITY IMPACT 
This action aims to support all homeowners and 
renters, but with a specific focus on those groups 
which are most vulnerable to flooding: those who 
have been flooded in the past, and those who live 
in basements. Anecdotal evidence suggests that 
basement dwellers, particularly renters, are more 
likely to be part of an equity seeking group such 
as lower-income Torontonians or new Canadians, 
and that basement renters are less likely to have 
insurance or access to support in case of a flood. 
This project will also support the City in better 
understanding the demographics of climate 
vulnerability in Toronto’s homes, a key input 
required to support an equity focus in actions such 
as B1.4, which intends to use social vulnerability 
data to target other investments.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

73

NEXT STEPS 
•  Engage industry for technical analysis to 

• 

expand the scope of the existing assessment 
process to address a more holistic set of risks. 
Find partner(s) such as the insurance sector, to 
support subsidized home assessments for the 
most vulnerable. 

•  Work with City partners, such as Strategic 

Communications, to develop the online 
assessment tool, and to communicate its 
availability to targeted groups.
Implement Action A1.1 to help residents 
understand how to take action to address 
climate risk at home.

• 

We live in an apartment 
building in Scarborough. There 
is no air condition. It is very hot 
in the summer. We don’t like to 
stay at home. The window can 
only open a small crack, so the 
air circulation is not good. It is 
very hot in our house.

74 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

BALDWIN VILLAGE, PHOTO BY ERIC SEHR

 

ACTION A1.2
PRIORITY ACTION:  
 
VERTICAL RESILIENCE
 
Enable wide-scale change 
in apartment towers to 
improve resilience through 
the improvement or retrofit of 
apartment towers and units

THE CHALLENGE 
The overlap of climate risks and vulnerability in Toronto’s 
aging high-rise rental apartment towers represents the single 
most pressing, urgent priority for the city’s resilience. Over 
500,000 Torontonians live in high-rise apartment towers that 
are more than 35 years old, and there are key resilience risks 
in these buildings. Many have not updated heating systems 
and windows since they were built, so they are inefficient and 
susceptible to failure. Many do not have sufficient back-up 
power to allow residents to shelter in place, meaning when 
there is an extended power failure, key systems including heat, 
water, elevators and lighting, may not work. Almost all do not 
have central air conditioning (94%), and indoor temperatures 
often reach unhealthy levels in warm weather. 

The residents of Toronto’s apartment towers are also more 
vulnerable to the above risks. Many families, newcomers, and 
seniors live in these towers; 40% of families living in towers are 
low income. These communities will likely have more difficulty 
recovering from extreme weather.

The towers represent 45% of the market rental housing stock 
in Toronto. The majority of these buildings are privately owned 
rental apartments (85%). It is essential that these buildings 
continue to provide quality, affordable housing for generations 
to come.

International evidence shows that deep retrofits of towers - 
which go beyond state of good repair to include improving 
the building envelope to improve insulation, new heating/hot 
water equipment, better ventilation and cooling, accessibility 

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

HOUSING

EQUITY

COMMUNITY AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

BENEFITS
Safe, livable and affordable housing and 
a resilient housing stock

LEAD
•  Resilience Office (City of Toronto)

KEY PARTNERS
•  Social Development Finance 

Administration (City of Toronto)

•  Toronto Building (City of Toronto)
•  Energy and Environment Division (City 

of Toronto)

•  Municipal Licensing and Standards 

(City of Toronto)

•  Toronto Public Health (City of Toronto)
•  Toronto Fire Services (City of Toronto)
•  Toronto Atmospheric Fund
•  Tower Renewal Partnership
•  Greater Toronto Apartment Association
•  Government of Canada
•  Province of Ontario

FUNDING
Funding is required to complete 
technical guidelines. Aiming to leverage 
federal and provincial funding through 
new and existing programs such as 
the National Housing Strategy, Federal 
climate finance, Province’s Carbon Trust, 
and investment from building owners.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

75

upgrades, fire system upgrades, and emergency 
backup power - result in: 
• 

Improved resilience to risks such as power 
failures, heatwaves, and extreme cold; 

•  Better physical conditions that benefit the 

physical and mental health of residents; 

•  Greater building value for the owner and for the 

tax base; and

•  Decreased GHG emissions, by 50% or more. 

Many of these buildings are reasonably well-
maintained given the constraints under which they 
operate. However, even well-maintained buildings 
are at risk from external shocks, such as power 
failures, which are often related to extreme weather 
events. Improving resilience in these buildings 
will ultimately require deep retrofit initiatives 
that bundle together resilience and efficiency 
improvements. These actions would effectively 
extend the life of these buildings ensuring they 
continue to provide housing for generations to 
come. There is tremendous opportunity to enhance 
resilience, reduce carbon emissions, improve 
health and comfort, create jobs, and preserve 
critical housing supply through deep retrofit. Deep 
retrofits fundamentally change the operating 
standard of buildings and make it possible for 
these buildings to extend their useful lives. 

Further, a sizeable minority of the towers have one 
or more critical systems (e.g. heating, hot water, 
electrical, ventilation, elevators, and fire safety 
systems) which are well past their expected life. 
Residents of these buildings are at particularly 
high risk of building systems failing in response to 
shocks such as flooding or freezing, or simply the 
passage of time. 

However, to date there are few examples of deep 
retrofits in Toronto. Financial modeling completed 
by the Resilience Office indicates that “deep” 
retrofits without a broader business case simply 
are not economic for private building owners under 
current conditions. 

City programs to improve quality of life in 
apartment buildings. Over the past ten years, the 
City has created a number of programs to improve living 
conditions in Toronto’s apartment towers. RentSafeTO is 
a bylaw enforcement program that ensures that building 
owners and operators comply with minimum building 
maintenance standards. Its goal is to ensure that residents 
of Toronto have a clean, safe and secure place to call 
home by: strengthening the enforcement of City bylaws; 
enhancing tenant engagement and access to information; 
and promoting preventative maintenance in apartment 
buildings to prevent deterioration of standards

The Tower Renewal Program offers residents and building 
owners supports to improve the quality of life in towers, 
including holistic site assessments, and support for tower 
community initiatives. It also provides access to low-cost 
financing to make energy efficiency retrofits through 
the Hi-RIS program. Low-cost financing is also available 
for community-based organizations and not-for-profits 
through the Sustainable Energy Plan Financing program.

THE ACTION 
The Resilience Office led a cross-divisional and 
multi-stakeholder process to better understand 
what policy changes could be made to enable a 
wider uptake of improvements and deep retrofits of 
towers while maintaining affordability for residents. 

Leveraging data from the City’s RentSafeTO 
program, new research from CMHC including 
updated costing data for retrofits, participation of 
tower owners, and development of a new financial 
model, the Resilience Office produced analysis 
that supports a new set of actions for the City, 
the Province, and the Federal government. This 
research has two key findings: 
•  The incentives already provided by the City, like 

through the High-Rise Retrofit Improvement 
Support Program (Hi-RIS), and other partners 
are sufficient such that it is economically viable 
for most tower owners to make initial, smaller 
and medium-sized retrofits and upgrades that 
decrease energy use and improve resilience, 
such as installing more efficient lighting and 

76 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

water fixtures.  

•  To enable deep retrofit of towers, changes to 
existing policy instruments are required from 
a combination of the Federal, Provincial, and 
Municipal governments. 

affordability, avoiding displacement of tenants, and 
supporting the economic viability for owners. This 
will be coordinated with TransformTO’s work to 
develop retrofit technical guidelines for all existing 
buildings.

The process also highlighted:
•  A lack of clarity on the technical specifics what 
constitutes a ‘deep retrofit’ in towers, and how 
to maximize the value of retrofits for resilience; 
and

•  The continued need for leadership and 

partnership among a wide range of actors 
active in the retrofit space to ensure a 
coordinated, sustained effort to expand retrofit 
opportunities. 

Given those findings, the Resilience Office will 
continue to advocate for changes that support 
deep retrofits, with the following priorities:

• 

Support changes at the Federal or Provincial 
Level
The Federal government has several tools which 
could improve the enabling environment for deep 
retrofits, including: 
•  Changing the Capital Cost Allowance tax 

classification for deep retrofits to align with 
other GHG-reducing incentives, like those for 
electric vehicles. Reclassifying deep retrofits 
would have a fundamental and systemic 
change to the business case for retrofits; and
 Providing further support through the National 
Housing Strategy or other initiatives to reduce 
the net costs of deep retrofits, either through 
grants or loans.

Develop technical guidelines for deep retrofits.
The City will compile technical guidelines for 
performance standards of buildings doing deep 
retrofits, which include costs, savings, and existing 
incentives. Guidelines are required as a support 
to policy changes and business owners. There 
are a number of existing guidelines which can be 
used as a base, although some are dated and are 
missing resilience as a focus. In doing this, the 
City should ensure the actions achieve the most 
effective suite of updates while also maintaining 

The Provincial government could also support 
deep retrofits, such as through the Made in Ontario 
Environment plan. Deep retrofits align to Plan’s 
priorities of resilience and supporting business 
owners to reduce energy costs. 

Embed resilience into the City’s existing towers 
leadership
The City’s Tower Renewal Program and the Better 
Buildings Partnership are supporting building 

BUILDING A SNOWMAN AT PARKWAY 
FOREST PARK, PHOTO BY ROILAN 
GENSAYA, SUBMITTED TO THE SNAP & 
SHARE PHOTO CONTEST, 2015

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

77

owners to upgrade their buildings with a number 
of programs and financial supports. The City 
should continue support for these programs and 
ensure programs have the mandate and tools to 
support a broad suite of resilience retrofits. 

While the City is limited in its authority to set 
standards for construction activity, the City does 
have the authority to set maintenance standards 
(under the Building Code Act) and pass regulations 
related to the “economic, social and environmental 
well-being of the City, including respecting climate 
change” (under City of Toronto Act, section 8(2)5.). 
The City will consider options for improving 
existing minimum standards to add resilience 
requirements that have been shown through this 
work to be economically viable.

The City will also review the information it collects 
on apartment towers through the RentSafeTO 
registration process to identify possible 
opportunities to improve the available resilience 
data on buildings. 

Lead a resilience and deep retrofit collaboration 
with City and external partners
The City will continue to collaborate with industry 
and owner representatives; non-governmental 
organizations, like Tower Renewal Partnership; 
residents associations; Toronto Atmospheric 
Fund; utilities; and divisions with a clear mandate 
to advance vertical resilience. This will be done 
through existing tables, including the City’s 
interdivisional committee on tower renewal and 
including external stakeholders when needed. A 
multi-stakeholder approach works to break down 
silos and improve coordination.

Investing in resilience will have costs: in the form 
of grants or delayed or foregone revenues for 
governments; for tenants in terms of disturbance 
and in some cases above guideline rent increases; 
and for building owners in the form of risks 
associated with all construction projects and 

long-term investments. However, not making 
investments also has costs, though they are difficult 
to quantify. Moreover, investments will also result 
in real, tangible benefits, including better living 
conditions, dramatically reduced energy and water 
use, reduced greenhouse gas emissions, improved 
resilience, and continued use of important building 
assets that are located throughout the city on 
critical transportation routes.  

EQUITY IMPACT
These towers have the highest concentration of 
resilience risks, such as exposure to heatwaves 
and power failures, and a high concentration of 
vulnerability, such as low-income families, seniors 
living alone, new Canadians, and single-parent 
households. This action improves housing quality – 
a major determinant of vulnerability – among equity 
seeking groups. 

Deep retrofit investment in towers also presents 
a generational opportunity for social, economic, 
and environmental improvements to tower 
neighbourhoods. There is a significant opportunity 
to create local jobs, support innovation, and drive 
investment in lower-income communities through 
retrofits. 

NEXT STEPS
•  Drive deep retrofits through:

 -

 -

 -

 Developing deep retrofit technical guidelines, 
building on the significant existing research 
such as from the Tower Renewal Partnership, 
and in consultation with owners, residents, 
academia, and industry;
Advocating for changes to the Federal and 
Provincial governments to improve the 
enabling environment for deep retrofits; and
Integrating resilience into the City’s voluntary 
programs. 

•  Convene City divisions and external partners to 

maintain and build momentum for deep retrofits. 

78 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

ALIGNED LOCAL ACTION: Resilience retrofits to Toronto Community 
Housing towers

Toronto Community Housing (TCH), a City-owned corporation, is the largest social housing 
provider in Canada and the second largest in North America. TCH has 2,100 buildings and 50 
million square feet of residential space, which represent a $9 billion public asset, including 170 
towers with 8 or more storeys.

TCH is undertaking deep retrofit at 21 of its apartment towers, funded by the Province of Ontario 
through the Social Housing Apartment Improvement Program (SHAIP), the Social Housing 
Apartment Repair Program (SHARP), and by the Energy and Environment Division at the City 
through a Sustainable Energy Program loan. They are making resilience, energy efficiency and 
quality of life improvements, including: installing efficient toilets, shower heads and faucets; 
upgrading heating and ventilation systems; installing efficient lights and adding light sensors 
in parking garages; replacing single pane windows; installing suite temperature controls; and 
exchanging window air conditioning units with more efficient in-unit air conditioning.
 
They are also improving insulation by adding over-cladding to the exterior of 12 of the 21 
buildings, creating a more comfortable environment inside; improving indoor air quality, including 
temperature, in the winter and summer; and significantly reducing gas consumption.  Construction 
began late fall 2018 and will continue into 2020.

TCH is also installing Combined Heat and Power (CHP) generators at 40 sites and upgrading 
emergency generators in 2020. The emergency generators upgrades will allow tenants to shelter 
in place during loss of external power. The CHP generators will generate electricity onsite, 
reducing the dependence on TCH’s most costly utility.

MID CENTURY 
APARTMENT TOWER, 
PHOTO BY ERIC SEHR

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

79

ACTION A1.3

Apply a resilience lens to the 
development of the new HousingTO 
2020-2030 Action Plan and ensure 
comprehensive action to address 
Toronto’s affordable housing gaps 
across the full spectrum of need

THE CHALLENGE
City of Toronto staff, community partners, and housing experts in 
Toronto have identified solutions to address the City’s affordable 
housing gaps. However, more work needs to be done to create 
an enabling environment in which there is sufficient flexibility, 
momentum, and mechanisms to implement the spectrum of these 
solutions. 

In 2019, the City is developing a new, ten-year housing plan which 
presents an opportunity to embed the issue of affordable housing 
within a larger resilience framework supporting vulnerable and 
low-income Torontonians to truly thrive. The ten-year housing plan 
will contribute to the development of a more inclusive city in which 
vulnerable and low-income groups are not just able to bounce back 
after a shock, but to recover in a way that makes them stronger and 
even more resilient than they were before the shock (some scholars 
call this bouncing forward). As urban design scholar Jon Lang 
advocates, housing environments are connective spaces that can 
either open up residents to broader opportunities or restrict them.

THE ACTION 
To support the development of a more resilient city, the new 
HousingTO 2020-2030 Action Plan should consider the provision of 
a range of housing options in the context of a variety of other issues. 
These issues include: 
•  Developing complete communities; 
•  Updating the land use planning framework to allow for the 
provision of viable housing options and the creation of safe 

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

HOUSING

EQUITY

BENEFITS
Improved housing affordability, 
and a housing stock that 
contributes to the City’s overall 
resilience 

LEAD
•  Affordable Housing Office (City 

of Toronto) 

KEY PARTNERS
•  Resilience Office (City of 

Toronto)

•  Shelter, Support and Housing 
Administration (City of Toronto)

FUNDING
No new funding sources 
are required to apply a 
resilience lens to the plan. The 
implementation of this action 
requires a commitment to 
integrate a resilience lens into 
current and future work, relying 
on the expertise of staff and 
partners.

80 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

neighborhoods across large geographies 
within the city; 

•  Designing open spaces that provide safe 

places for people to gather and children to 
play; 

•  Designing mobility systems that provide 

access to employment, services, and retail; 

•  Preparing the existing housing supply for 

extreme weather, including floods, heat waves 
and cold snaps; 

•  Providing supportive infrastructure and 

community services, including community 
centres and libraries; 

•  Addressing the wait list and repair backlog for 

social and supportive housing; 

•  Designing systems of engagement that allow 

people to participate meaningfully in their own 
governance; 

•  Supporting housing organizations to deal with 

crisis; and

•  Ensuring resiliency of the aging stock of rental 
and social housing, including rental apartment 
buildings (as described in A1.2). 

This will be guided by work to develop a resilient 
lens for infrastructure projects (Action B2.1).

NEXT STEPS 
•  Continue to deliver on the City’s Housing Now 

initiative to construct affordable rental units 
across Toronto. 

•  Continue to advance Toronto Community 

Housing’s Tenants First initiative to give 
residents greater opportunities to have a say in 
the operation of their buildings.

•  Deliver Toronto’s next HousingTO Plan by the 

end of 2019. 

SUMMER IN 
THORNCLIFFE PARK

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

81

82 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

ST JAMESTOWN, PHOTO BY ERIC SEHR

GOAL A2: 
Communities take action to 
improve resilience in their 
neighbourhoods

Communities are the first to experience any shock. This goal is to build more resilient 
communities in every neighbourhood across Toronto. 

International evidence shows that lower income neighbourhoods tend to do worse in 
shocks and recover more slowly, and that neighbourhoods with high levels of social 
capital do better in shocks. Cities around the world - including San Francisco, Melbourne, 
and Vancouver - are designing and implementing community resilience projects to 
strengthen their infrastructure and response plans to recover from future shocks. Through 
these projects, cities also aim to build on the capacity of residents, organizations, and 
businesses to come together, utilize assets, and adapt to address emerging needs and 
challenges.

ACTIONS
2.1   Enhance the capacity of neighbourhoods to prepare for and 
recover from shocks through grassroots action and network 
building

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

83

ACTION A2.1
PRIORITY ACTION:  
NEIGHBOURHOOD RESILIENCE

 

 

Enhance the capacity of 
neighbourhoods to prepare for 
and recover from shocks through 
grassroots action and network 
building

At the heart of a resilient community is a 
robust set of social networks which help 
people address the challenges in their day-
to-day lives, as well as those that occur in 
times of extreme stress. 

- WELLINGTON (NEW ZEALAND) REGION EMERGENCY 
MANAGEMENT OFFICE COMMUNITY RESILIENCE STRATEGY 

THE CHALLENGE
Toronto’s ability to be resilient will rely on strong and prepared 
neighbourhoods. Connected communities with active local 
networks of engaged residents, community leaders, community 
centres, faith-based organizations, libraries, and local not-for-profits 
and organizations are better prepared to survive, adapt, and thrive in 
response to a shock.

But not all neighbourhoods fare the same in the face of shock. 
Communities that experience historic underinvestment, high 
levels of food insecurity, concentrated poverty, and a lack of social 
infrastructure are hardest hit by extreme weather and other shocks. 
After a shock, these communities take longer to recover. Over the 
last 10 years, income inequality has grown significantly in Toronto, 
increasing inequities in neighbourhoods with predominantly 
racialized and newcomer residents (learn more on pages 52-53). 
There is also significant food insecurity: 1 in 7 households in Toronto 
are food insecure. 

84 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES 

EQUITY

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

CIVIC 

ENGAGEMENT

COMMUNITY AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

BENEFITS
Communities are more prepared 
for shocks and stresses, and are 
able to recover from them more 
quickly

LEADS
•  Resilience Office (City of Toronto)
•  Social Development, Finance 

and Administration (SDFA, City of 
Toronto)

KEY PARTNERS
•  Parks, Forestry and Recreation 

(City of Toronto)

•  Office of Emergency 

Management (OEM, City of 
Toronto)

•  Toronto Public Health (TPH, City 

of Toronto) 

•  Energy and Environment Division 

(City of Toronto)

•  Toronto Public Library (TPL)

FUNDING
For 2019, funding for this action 
will come from existing budget 
envelopes as well as alternate 
sources. The Resilience Office may 
request additional funding from 
Council in 2020.

In response, the City has made key investments to advance equitable economic, social, health, 
environmental, and engagement outcomes across Toronto neighbourhoods, including through the 
Toronto Strong Neighbourhoods Strategy 2020. 

The City now needs to make critical complementary investments in neighbourhood-based resilience 
planning that advances more equitable outcomes for residents. 

THE ACTION
Through the Neighbourhood Resilience Initiative, the City will support organizations and grassroots 
leaders to help neighbourhoods prepare for, respond to, and recover from small to large-scale shocks.
Community organizations are at the forefront of neighbourhood resilience and this action seeks to 
support the efforts, creativity, and expertise of these organizations. The Initiative will be a collaboration 
between Social Development, Finance and Administration (SDFA), the Office of Emergency Management 
(OEM), Toronto Public Health (TPH), the Resilience Office and community-based organizations and 
residents.

It will start with a two-year pilot project beginning in 2020. As part of the pilot, partners will come 
together to develop and implement an assessment and action planning process in three Neighbourhood 
Improvement Areas (NIAs). This initiative will bring together the knowledge of what a resilient community 
looks like from a variety of disciplines and perspectives, and develop a comprehensive process that 
neighbourhoods can use to build on strengths and address gaps. The pilot will identify opportunities for 
capacity building, coordination, action and increased local collaboration. It will also explore how City and 
non-City-owned community assets, like parkland, libraries, community centres, and child centres, can 
continue to play a role in building resilience.

Community organizations as leaders

Community organizations are at the forefront of resilience 
action. Toronto’s 140+ neighbourhoods are home to many 
community organizations who serve, represent, celebrate, 
and foster well-being in different ways. Many of these 
organizations are guided by residents and community 
leaders, and have an intimate understanding of needs, 
ideas, and relationships that are critical to building resilience 
to acute shocks and long-term stresses. Beyond providing 
key community services, organizations such as the Jane 
Finch Community Centre and the East Scarborough 
Storefront, continue to explore strategies to leverage 
community benefits from public and private investment. 
As part of these strategies and thought leadership, both 
organizations have created space inventories to better 
understand evolving conditions of access to space, 
programming, and opportunities for community-led space 
activation with a variety of partners.

When I heard that a snow 
storm was coming, I was so 
worried, because it was my 
first winter in Canada. But 
a neighbour in my building 
helped me store food 
before the winter.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

85

shocks. NIAs generally are home to more residents 
from equity seeking groups than other Toronto 
neighbourhoods, including newcomers, racialized 
people, people with low-incomes and/or who are 
unemployed or on social assistance, and youth.

NEXT STEPS 
•  Work with partners to identify the three 

neighbourhoods that will take part in the pilot 
project by 2020.

•  Develop and implement a robust civic 

engagement process to work with communities 
and stakeholders in pilot communities to co-
create the neighbourhood resilience assessment 
and action planning process, and then work with 
those communities to implement plans.

The launch of the Neighbourhood Resilience 
Initiative will galvanize internal and external supports 
and resources for neighbourhood resilience across 
the city while building on existing efforts. The goal 
is to develop a replicable practice that can be 
disseminated and shared with other communities.

The initiative will align with the Toronto Strong 
Neighbourhoods Strategy 2020 and the Vulnerability 
Assessment of Toronto’s Food System. It will take 
a food systems approach (learn more on page 107) 
and integrate the Council-approved community 
food resilience action plan process. It also connects 
with the Office of Emergency Management’s broader 
aim to build community-based emergency response 
and management approaches.

 
EQUITY IMPACT 
Research suggests that low-income and other 
equity-seeking groups are at a greater vulnerability 
to climate shocks than the general population. 
This action will improve the way residents in NIAs 
are able to prepare for and recover from climate 

Resilient Conversations

The Resilience Office facilitated a series of conversations with 200 residents in Neighbourhood Improvement Areas 
in July and August, 2018, led by Local Champions, resident leaders who are part of a program led by Centre for 
Connected Communities as part of the Toronto Strong Neighbourhood Strategy. To guide these conversations, the 
Resilience Office worked with the Local Champions to co-create a Resilient Conversations Toolkit (available on the 
Resilience Office at toronto.ca/resilience). 

The Toolkit provided the Local Champions and leaders in other organizations with language, means, and opportunity 
to convene their own Resilient Conversations. The toolkit was made of six exercises that used storytelling, community 
mapping and historical reflection to drive conversation. The toolkit helped generate a grassroots understanding of how 
residents living in Neighbourhood Improvement Areas understand resilience. 

The Local Champions used the toolkit to guide conversations in neighbourhoods. These conversations yielded specific 
recommendations on how to improve resilience in each neighbourhood, including on issues related to emergency 
preparedness. Many of the conversations led to residents recommending that neighbourhood-based emergency 
preparedness plans be set up for each community based on their respective challenges, assets, and infrastructure. 

The Resilient Conversations model offers a starting point for Action A2.1: it successfully engaged residents in 
neighbourhoods that are at the highest risk and most vulnerability to shocks in conversations about resilience and 
emergency planning.

86 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

On August 21, 2018, the Resilience Office invited 25 
youth, aged 15 to 18 years old, participating in a summer 
employment project to take part in a resilience mapping 
exercise as a part of the Resilience Strategy engagement 
process. The exercise invited youth to honestly and 
openly map things that build and challenge their 
neighbourhood's resilience. This is one of the many maps 
created that day.   

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

87

GOAL A3: 
Poverty is eliminated and 
equity is improved

This goal supports a response to immediate needs, the creation of pathways to 
prosperity, and systemic change through which equity is strengthened in day-to-day 
decision-making. 

Through engagement, residents across Toronto said that their capacity to enable 
resilience in their communities and families is related to their opportunities and pathways 
to prosperity. These opportunities and pathways include access to jobs, education, 
healthcare and other services, and a decent and dignifying income. These issues have 
life-altering effects and their gravity impacts the well-being of the entire city. 

Although poverty and inequity are the result of complex, interrelated factors, local action 
and policy has a clear and enabling role. Becoming a city where all people are supported 
to live in healthy, prosperous, and dignified circumstances is not only a strategic goal, but 
a matter of fairness and justice in Toronto.

ACTIONS
3.1  Prioritize the implementation and resourcing of the Council-

approved Toronto Poverty Reduction Strategy 

88 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

ACTION A3.1

Prioritize the implementation and 
resourcing of the Council-approved 
Toronto Poverty Reduction Strategy 

THE CHALLENGE
One in four children and one in five adults live in poverty in 
Toronto. They fear eviction, walk to save a token, are forced to 
choose the cheapest and least nutritious food, tell government 
agencies the same information over and over again to access 
supports, and worry that the opportunities enjoyed by other 
children will be denied to theirs. That is what life is like for too 
many residents in Toronto. 

Tackling poverty is essential to creating a resilient, stronger 
Toronto. As long as significant numbers of Torontonians lack 
access to quality jobs and stable incomes, the city and its 
residents continue to remain vulnerable to the city’s resilience 
challenges. 

THE ACTION 
The Toronto Poverty Reduction Strategy is a concrete, 20-year 
plan that was unanimously approved by City Council in 2015. 
It contains 17 recommendations linked to a set of actions to 
be implemented over a four-year period. Annual work plans 
identify initiatives that advance actions. The Poverty Reduction 
Strategy focuses on housing stability, services access, transit 
equity, food access, the quality of jobs and incomes, and 
systemic change. All of these issues speak to the resilience 
of households, communities, neighbourhoods, and Toronto 
as a whole. The forthcoming update to the Poverty Reduction 
Strategy has the opportunity to address the inequity concerns 
heard from community members throughout the development 

of this Resilience Strategy. 

NEXT STEPS 
•  Continue to advance completion of the 2019-2022 Poverty 
Reduction Action Plan, to be considered by City Council in 
2019.

•  Advance funding of this Plan as part of future budget 

processes.

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

COMMUNITY AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

BENEFITS
Immediate needs of residents are met, 
new pathways out of poverty are created 
and are sustained through systemic 
change  

LEAD
•  Poverty Reduction Strategy Office (City 

of Toronto)

KEY PARTNERS
•  All City of Toronto Divisions, Agencies, 

Boards and Commissions

•  Residents with lived-experience of 

poverty

•  Community-based agencies and 

service providers, including the United 
Way and Toronto Foundation

•  Business and Labour leadership
•  Province of Ontario
•  Government of Canada

FUNDING
In addition to the action plans, annual 
work plans and progress reports 
are developed to identify programs, 
services and initiatives that will be 
brought forward to City Council as part 
of the annual budget process. Actions 
approved in the 2019-2022 Action 
Plan with financial implications will be 
submitted to the 2020 City of Toronto 
budget process. 

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

89

FOCUS AREA B: 
INFRASTRUCTURE

Infrastructure

This area focuses on making our shared, human-made 
and natural infrastructure more resilient, and using that 
infrastructure for a more resilient Toronto.

“We need to reframe risk to 
include the risk of not acting. The 
risk of not investing.” 

– PARTICIPANT ON THE RESILIENCE STEERING COMMITTEE 

UNDERPASS PARK, 
PHOTO BY ERIC SEHR

90 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

GOAL B1: 
Toronto is more resilient to 
climate change, including 
the hazards of flooding and 
heat

Toronto needs to become more resilient to the shocks and stresses of changing climate.

Toronto experiences a wide range of significant climate hazards. Projections indicate that 
human-caused climate change will result in ‘hotter, wetter, wilder’ weather in Toronto in 
the near future. This will come in the form of shocks (storms will be more intense, number 
of heat waves will increase) and stresses (higher daily summer temperatures, higher daily 
rain volumes). And yet Toronto will also continue to experience the shocks and stresses 
associated with severe winter storms and very cold weather.

The actions presented here are focused on the two hazards that pose the greatest and 
fastest growing risk to residents – flooding and extreme heat. The City’s own investments 
and plans must be resilient to climate change while City partners and Toronto’s 
businesses and residents must also be supported to be more resilient. Applying an equity 
lens, these efforts should focus on the populations who are most vulnerable to each 
hazard.

ACTIONS
1.1 

Institutionalize an integrated, resilience approach to flooding by 
adopting the Flood Resilient Toronto Charter

1.2  Centralize resources towards a city-wide flood planning and 

prioritization tool 

1.3  Review and update existing flood mitigation programs to account 

for resilience

1.4  Take action to mitigate the effects of extreme heat 
1.5  Communicate, synthesize and scale up ongoing City efforts to 

advance a system of green and blue infrastructure

1.6  Promote a sustainable and resilient food system 

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

91

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

HOUSING

MOBILITY

BENEFITS
A unified vision to address 
flooding, improved city-wide 
resilience to flooding

LEAD
•  Resilience Office (City of 

Toronto)

KEY PARTNERS
•  Toronto Water (City of Toronto)
•  Flood Resilience Working 

Group (see page 96 for full list)

FUNDING
No funding required.

ACTION B1.1
 
Institutionalize an integrated, 
resilience approach to flooding by 
adopting the Flood Resilient Toronto 
Charter

A common vision as well as cross-sector 
collaboration and continuous improvement can 
solidify Toronto as a world leader in flood resilience.

THE CHALLENGE
Toronto’s risk of heavy flooding from rainfall is evident and growing. 
Toronto has experienced five severe storms since 2000, causing 
widespread damage and disruption. The summer of 2017 saw 
extreme amounts of rain, which led to Lake Ontario reaching record 
high water levels, flooding the Toronto Islands. Global climate 
change will result in increased intensity of these storms, increasing 
the risk of flooding and its impact, while the city’s growth has put 
more people and property at risk. Page 94 describes some of the 
impacts of flooding in Toronto since 2000. 

Over the past two decades Toronto has made extensive 
investments and efforts to mitigate flood risk, and the collective 
expertise, capacity and commitment is in place. However, there 
is room for improvement. Flooding is a risk to all elements of the 
city – residents, businesses, private and public property, utilities, 
transportation networks and more – which is why an integrated 
approach to flooding is needed. 

THE ACTION
The Resilience Office assembled the Flood Resilience Working 
Group and facilitated a unique, year-long collaboration between 18 
people from City divisions, agencies, the private sector; academia, 
and other orders of government. Supported by international 
consultation and a workshop by Deltares – a globally leading 
institute on flood resilience – the Working Group examined 
challenges and developed solutions to flooding in Toronto. 

92 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

The Flood Resilient Toronto Charter was created by the Working Group to set goals for flood resilience and 
to guide decision-making in the City around a collective vision and set of principles to reduce flooding in 
Toronto. The Charter’s seven actions represent consensus among the Working Group members on best 
practices to mitigate flood risk.  The Charter will be signed by senior leaders of 17 organizations to guide 
effective decision making that benefits the city as a whole. The Flood Resilience Working Group will be 
formalized to operationalize the Charter and promote collaboration between stakeholders.

FLOOD RESILIENT TORONTO CHARTER

1.  Guide city planning, projects and programs 

based on greatest risk. Risk, taking vulnerability 
and impact into account, is to be assessed based 
on a social cost-benefit analysis considering 
physical flood hazards, social vulnerabilities and 
critical infrastructure. 

2.  Use city-wide modelling to identify probability 

and impact of flooding, and map critical 
infrastructure, physical and social vulnerabilities. 
Produce an intuitive map that can be applied by 
multiple stakeholders.

3.  Use risk mapping and forecasting to guide 

funding and deployment of operational 
resources. Operations staff and technology 
should be assigned geographically and funded 

based on return on investment versus flood risk 
and achievable level of service.

4.  Plan and fund capital projects based on the 

outputs of flood risk modelling, aligning 
investment with a social cost-benefit analysis 
accounting for return on investment and 
achievable level of service.  

5.  Encourage new partnerships and innovative 
technical approaches; shift thinking towards 
flood resilience.

6.  Collaborate locally, nationally and 

internationally, and demonstrate leadership in 
flood resilience. 

7.  Communicate flood risk to the public and 

stakeholders, and encourage residents and 
businesses to take action.

FLOOD RESILIENCE WORKING GROUP 

CITY DIVISIONS
•  Toronto Water 
•  Environment and Energy 
•  City Planning 
•  Transportation Services 
•  Engineering and Construction Services 
•  Toronto Building 
•  Resilience Office
• 

Facilities

AGENCIES
•  Toronto Transit Commission 
•  Toronto Hydro 

•  Metrolinx 
•  Toronto and Region Conservation 

Authority 

PROVINCIAL MINISTRY/ASSOCIATION
•  Ministry of Environment, 
Conservation and Parks 

•  Conservation Ontario 

PRIVATE SECTOR/ACADEMIA
• 

Institute for Catastrophic Loss 
Reduction 
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation 

• 
•  University of Toronto

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

93

EQUITY IMPACT
The Flood Resilience Charter accounts for social vulnerabilities in assessing flood risk. The desired 
outcome of this focus is to decrease vulnerability to flooding to equity seeking groups.

NEXT STEPS 
•  City divisions, agencies and external partners on the Flood Resilience Working Group adopt the Flood 

• 

charter as Toronto’s vision for flood resilience. 
Institutionalize the Flood Resilience Working Group and add partners, such as Parks, Forestry & 
Recreation (City of Toronto), as required.

A Recent History of Flooding in Toronto

A number of floods have significantly impacted Toronto in the last 
two decades: 
•  On May 12, 2000, a storm produced over 90mm of rainfall and 

generated more than 3,000 basement flooding complaints. 

•  On August 19, 2005, a storm lasting three hours produced up 

to 153mm of rainfall. Over $620 million of private and public 
damage occurred. This storm resulted in more than 4,100 
basement flooding complaints. 

•  On July 8, 2013, Toronto received more than 100mm of rain 

within a period of 90 minutes. The storm caused a significant 
power outage and 300,000 Torontonians lost power for several 
hours. Flooding heavily disrupted GO Transit and Toronto Transit 
Commission service, halting operations in multiple locations in 
the City, necessitated a rescue operation to escort passengers 
from a train stuck on flooded tracks adjacent to the Don River. 
The storm resulted in $1 billion in damages, mostly to private 
properties - the costliest disaster in Ontario’s history, resulting in 
almost 4,800 basement flooding complaints being reported to 
the City. 
In spring 2017, snow melt and an exceptionally rainy spring 
contributed to Lake Ontario water levels reaching the highest 
elevation ever recorded. The Toronto Islands and its 800 
residents, businesses and schools were directly impacted, with 
Toronto Island Park closed for three months. 

• 

•  On August 7, 2018 a localized and slow moving storm resulted 

in more than 100mm of rain falling in two hours in different 
locations of the city. This event halted the Toronto Transit 
Commission service on certain lines, severely damaged 9 
street cars, and generated more than 700 basement flooding 
complaints.

94 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

DAMAGE FROM AUGUST 19, 2005 STORM (PHOTO FROM 
JANE-FINCH.COM)

ALIGNED LOCAL ACTION: Port Lands Flood Protection

The Port Lands Flood Protection Project is an unprecedented opportunity to revitalize the Don River 
and transform Toronto’s eastern waterfront and is Toronto’s flagship resilience project. Approximately 
290 hectares (or 715 acres) of residential and industrial land around the mouth of the Don River will 
be protected from flooding during the equivalent of a Hurricane Hazel storm. The project will feature 
a new mixed-use island community, known as Villiers Island, as well as a naturalized mouth of the 
Don River and with a new natural greenway that will promote wetland diversity and support habitat 
for fish, birds and wildlife. The new Villiers Island development includes new housing (of which at 
least 20% will be affordable), new office and retail space, a community centre, and new parkland. The 
neighbourhood will promote access to nature, active modes of transportation, and will be connected 
to the downtown core and neighbourhoods to the east via rapid transit. This $1.25 billion project is 
funded by the three levels of government and is a cooperative venture with numerous City Divisions, 
Waterfront Toronto, the Toronto and Region Conservation Authority (TRCA), and other agencies, 
including CreateTO (Toronto Port Lands Company). 

RENDERING OF THE NEW VILLIER’S ISLAND “A PARK FOR PEOPLE”

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

95

 

 

ACTION B1.2
PRIORITY ACTION:  
FLOOD RESILIENCE
 
Centralize resources towards a city-
wide flood planning and prioritization 
tool

 

THE CHALLENGE
Currently, extensive effort is undertaken to create engineering 
models of drainage systems, and to map the floodplains of the city’s 
rivers. However, Toronto does not have a city-wide map of urban 
flooding risk that is accessible to all partners in flood planning and 
the public. Urban flooding ocurs when rainfall overwhelms sewer 
and drainage capacity, forcing the water to flow overland. This is a 
key gap identified by the Resilience Strategy development process.

THE ACTION
With support from the Flood Resilience Working Group, the 
Resilience Office will synthesize existing data sets and establish 
a high-level city-wide mapping tool to identify and prioritize 
problematic urban flooding areas. The tool will be used for planning, 
infrastructure prioritization, utility-based decisions, operations 
planning and deployment, prioritizing emergency management 
resources, and communicating with the public to encourage at-risk 
residents to act. 

With the input of the Flood Resilience Working Group, this tool will 
account for flood risk using topography and sewer capacity and 
overlay key concerns such as critical infrastructure and vulnerable 
populations. Many great data sets currently exist within the City 
and its partners and will be centralized. The Climate Change Risk 
Assessment Tool and Process, developed by Environment and 
Energy and Transportation Services, is an example of a successful 
initiative that identifies, ranks and prioritizes risks for action; however 
it is missing temporal and geospatial information. 

Flood mitigation allows a unique opportunity to work together to 
develop creative, collaborative solutions – city-wide risk mapping 
will provide an opportunity for multiple stakeholders to identify 

96 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

HOUSING

MOBILITY

BENEFITS
Improved coordination and 
planning related to reducing 
flood risk

LEAD
•  Resilience Office (City of 

Toronto)

KEY PARTNERS
•  Toronto Water (City of Toronto) 
•  Flood Resilience Working 

Group 

•  Geospatial Competency 

Centre (City of Toronto) 

FUNDING
As scope of the tool is finalized, 
funding will be determined 
based on investments from 
stakeholders, available grants, 
and potential investment from 
partners such as provincial and 
federal governments.

needs and work together to develop objective 
and multi-functional solutions. There may also be 
opportunities to adapt and apply the tool to other 
hazards, like extreme heat. The Resilience Office 
will lead the development of the tool with input 
from the Flood Resilience Working Group, which 
will direct the use and update of this tool moving 
forward.  The Resilience Office would collaborate 
closely with Toronto Water to produce a robust, 
intuitive tool with a version that is available online 
to the public.  A review of several Canadian cities 
undertaken by the Working Group shows little to 
no correlation between house prices and flood 
mapping risk, and will allow for recognition and 
action on flood risk. 

The tool can be used to support Action A1.1 and 
A1.2 of the Strategy to help houses (Action A1.1) 
and tower owners (Action A1.2) take action against 
flood risk.

EQUITY IMPACT 
The flood mapping tool will include data regarding 
equity-seeking groups and other vulnerable 
populations, where possible, so that it can be 
used in decision making about reducing flood 
risk. The tool will then enable integrated planning, 
which will help focus on reducing system impacts 
of flooding, which disproportionately impact the 
most vulnerable (i.e. a focus on power or transit 
outages rather than only on a person’s home 
flooding).

NEXT STEPS 
• 

Finalize the terms of reference and develop 
the technical scope for the mapping tool.

•  Procure a partner to support development of 

the tool.

WOODBINE BEACH

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

97

ACTION B1.3
 
Review and update existing flood 
mitigation programs to account for 
resilience

THE CHALLENGE
So far, the City has done extensive consultation and work 
to produce leading-edge wet weather flow management 
guidance. 

In 2003, Toronto released the Wet Weather Flow Master Plan, 
– a long term plan with the goal of reducing and ultimately 
eliminating the adverse impacts of wet weather flow on 
Toronto’s watersheds. The Plan identifies thirteen objectives 
including addressing stormwater quality and quantity, improving 
the City’s river and lake quality to allow swimming and healthy 
aquatic communities, reducing erosion and minimizing threat 
to property from flooding. The historic and comprehensive 
Plan made Toronto a leader in wet weather flow management, 
and aligned wet weather goals with those of the Province and 
neighbouring municipalities. 

The Basement Flooding Protection Program is a city-wide 
program that studies the capacity of the City’s existing storm, 
sanitary and combined sewer drainage systems, recommends 
and constructs infrastructure improvements, and subsidizes 
homeowner flood risk reduction efforts. The Program was 
created after the May 12, 2000, storm, and expanded city-wide 
in 2006. 

Significant progress has been made on these two programs, 
including City-wide Mandatory Downspout Disconnection, the 
completion of Basement Flooding Environmental Assessment 
Studies and construction and upgrade of stormwater 
management facilities and the advancement of the Don 
River and Central Waterfront Project to reduce stormwater 
and combined sewer overflow discharges into the City’s 
watercourses.

98 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

HOUSING

MOBILITY

BENEFITS
Improved effectiveness and 
longevity of ongoing flood 
mitigation programs 

LEADS
•  Resilience Office (City of 

Toronto)

•  Toronto Water (City of Toronto)

KEY PARTNERS
•  City Planning (City of Toronto) 
•  Toronto Region Conservation 

Authority 

•  Engineering and Construction 

Services (City of Toronto) 
•  Environment and Energy 
Division (City of Toronto) 

•  Transportation Services (City of 

Toronto)

FUNDING
Subsequent to the workshop, 
funding to be determined for 
review and update of existing 
programs.

The climate is changing and decision makers 
need that to take into account future climate risk 
to ensure proper solutions are proposed, and 
that these solutions are designed with assets’ full 
lifespans in mind. These flood mitigation programs 
must be refreshed and updated so that they 
continue to serve Toronto for generations to come. 

Operations play a fundamental role in flood 
resilience and rely on the collaboration and 
cooperation of multiple stakeholders. For example, 
Transportation Services’ Street Sweeping Program 
(Clean Roads to Clean Air Program) reduces the 
amount of road sediment that enters catch basins. 
This mitigates the impact of extreme rain and 
flooding by increasing the effectiveness of the 
drainage system and reduces both stormwater and 
air pollution by properly disposing of sediment. 
A review of operations with a collaborative, 
cross-division dialogue is needed to identify 
interdependencies, and align operational planning 
with risk and level of service. 

THE ACTION
The  Basement Flooding Protection Program 
is scheduled to complete the Environmental 
Assessment studies for all 67 Basement 
Flooding Study Areas in 2021, after which the 
older Environmental Assessment studies will 
need to be revisited and refreshed. The City will 
develop and refine an updated approach for use 
in these studies. Aligned with the schedule of the 
Basement Flooding Protection Program, the Wet 
Weather Flow Master Plan will be 18 years old in 
2021, and can be updated to integrate resilience. 
An operational framework addressing programs 
like the Street Sweeping Program for all flooding 
stakeholders will be developed and reviewed to 
reflect the Charter and align with updates to the 
Program and Plan. 

The City will consider the following factors in 
the review and update of the Wet Weather Flow 
Master Plan and Basement Flooding Program:

•  The principles of the Flood Resilient Toronto 

Charter (see page 93);

•  Substantive urbanization north of Toronto, as 

well as population growth in Toronto since 
2003, and their impacts of river water quality 
assessments;

•  Opportunities to use smart technology and 
innovate in wet weather flow management; 

•  Decision making that accounts for risk, 

critical infrastructure, and a “green, then grey 
approach” that promotes infrastructure to 
achieve multiple community benefits;

•  Vulnerable populations and the ways they are 
impacted by flooding, including people living 
in basement apartments; and

•  Climate change adaptation.

More collaboration between stakeholders 
and leveraging re-development opportunities 
is needed to create unique multi-functional 
solutions, similar to projects such as the Port 
Lands Flood Protection Project (learn more on 
page 95). 

EQUITY IMPACT
An integrated planning approach to flooding, and 
collaboration between different stakeholders, is 
more effective at offsetting the cascading effects 
of flooding caused by interdependencies, such 
as power outages or transit disruptions. Flooding 
and its knock-on effects disproportionately impact 
vulnerable and low-income Torontonians.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

99

NEXT STEPS 
•  Hold a workshop with key stakeholders by 

the end of 2019, led by the Resilience Office, 
to determine the overall scope and timelines 
for integrating resilience into flood mitigation 
strategies.

•  Through the Flood Resilient Toronto Working 
Group, develop an operational framework for 
completion in 2020 that defines an approach 
based on cross-divisional understanding, risk 
and level of service.

DELUGE, BY CAMERON 
MACMASTER

100 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

ACTION B1.4
 
Take action to mitigate the effects 
of extreme heat 

THE CHALLENGE
A ‘hotter, wetter, wilder’ Toronto will experience heatwaves 
more frequently and with more intensity and longer duration. 
Toronto will go from 12 very hot days per year to 31 by 2050, 
according to the Climate Atlas of Canada (hot days are days with 
temperatures above 30°C). 

Heat is a major health risk. The health impacts of extreme 
heat range from heat stress to heat stroke and death. In 2005, 
Environment Canada, Health Canada and Toronto Public Health 
estimated that between 1954 and 2000, heat contributed to an 
average of 120 premature deaths per year in Toronto. Current 
research suggests that Toronto’s annual average heat-related 
mortality could more than double by the 2050s. 

The impacts of heat are disproportionately felt by frail, elderly 
and isolated people. People experiencing low incomes, 
including those who are homeless or under-housed, are at 
higher risk of heat impacts, likely due to poorer quality housing, 
limited access to air conditioning, and the increased likelihood 
of pre-existing illness. 

Residents living in apartment buildings that do not have air 
conditioning are also vulnerable to extreme heat. Over 500,000 
Torontonians live in older apartment towers with eight or more 
storeys (as discussed in Action A1.2); the majority of these 
towers (94%) do not have central air conditioning, and indoor 
temperatures in buildings such as these are often higher 
than those outside – sometimes exceeding 30 degrees in 
summer.  People tend to experience heat-related symptoms in 
temperatures above 26 degrees.

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

BENEFITS
Improved city-wide resilience to 
heat, reduced urban heat island 
effect, and cooling for vulnerable 
groups 

LEAD
•  Toronto Public Health (City of 

Toronto)

KEY PARTNERS
•  Heat Relief Network Working 

Group 

•  Parks, Forestry and Recreation 

(City of Toronto) 

FUNDING
Funding will be required to 
develop a long-term heat 
strategy. A funding request will 
be made in 2020.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

101

THE ACTION
In March 2018, the Medical Officer of Health was 
directed to review the Heat Relief Network, which 
would increase access to cool spaces and to 
complete the review of the Cooling Centres. As 
a result, the City created the Heat Relief Working 
Group, led by the Deputy City Manager Corporate 
Services in partnership with the Medical Officer of 
Health. 

In 2019, the Working Group will pilot an action plan 
that includes an expanded heat relief network, 
education, a neighbour checking program, the 
addition of shade structures, and review of bylaws 
with Municipal Licensing and Standards. The 
Group will also develop long-term strategies 
to mitigate the impacts of heat, including the 
urban heat island effect, and will identify funding 
sources and a lead division to coordinate the 
implementation of the strategies. 

There are a number of related actions in this 
Strategy to reduce exposure to heat, including 

retrofits to apartment buildings (A1.2), reducing 
the urban heat island through the installation 
of green infrastructure (B1.2) and improving the 
preparedness of communities for heatwaves (A2.1). 

EQUITY IMPACT 
The impacts of extreme heat are disproportionately 
felt by equity-seeking groups, including people 
with low incomes, people who are homeless or 
under-housed, and other vulnerable groups, like 
seniors, people who are isolated, and people with 
pre-existing health issues. The action plan and 
long-term strategies to mitigate the impacts of 
heat will identify and implement strategies that 
address the needs of these equity-seeking groups.

NEXT STEPS
• 

 Heat Relief Working Group to develop a 
heat action plan and long-term strategies to 
mitigate the impacts of extreme heat.

102 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

SUMMER IN 
THORNCLIFFE PARK

ACTION B1.5

Communicate, synthesize and scale 
up ongoing City efforts to advance 
a system of green and blue 
infrastructure

THE CHALLENGE
In the past two years alone, Toronto has faced a wide range of 
climate shocks and stresses, including extreme heat, extreme 
cold, significant rainfall events, ice storms, wind storms, and 
the High Lake Effect. Toronto is unique in that it faces a very 
wide range of climate shocks and stresses. These risks can be 
mitigated through the development of a network of green and 
blue infrastructure – sometimes called Natural Infrastructure 
– that carefully and purposefully integrate natural elements 
into the built environment in ways that can help protect against 
flooding, mitigate the heat island effect, and improve air, soil, 
and water quality. Green and blue infrastructure can include 
bioswales, urban forestry, wetland habitats, green streets, and 
more. The impact of this natural infrastructure is significant: the 
benefits provided by trees in terms of air pollution filtration and 
energy savings (related to temperature moderation near homes 
and buildings) have been valued at more than $28 million a year 
(Strategic Forest Management Plan, 2012-2022, City of Toronto).

In addition to the tree canopy, Toronto’s ravines are one of the 
best examples globally of how green and blue infrastructure 
can make cities more resilient. The ravines, covering 17% of the 
city’s land mass, protect the city from flooding, reduce urban 
heat island effects, and support biodiversity. Toronto’s ravines  
are also an important asset for community development and 
recreation, and in some cases for mobility. The realization of these 
quality of life improvements are an important co-benefit that can 
accompany the development of all green and blue infrastructure 
projects. 

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

CIVIC 

ENGAGEMENT

BENEFITS
Improved resilience to heat 
and flooding, while building 
communities and recreation 
opportunities 

LEAD
•  Resilience Office (City of 

Toronto)

KEY PARTNERS
•  Green Streets Working 

Group 
• 
Flooding Working Group 
•  Ravine Strategy Working 

Group

•  Toronto and Region 

Conservation Authority

•  Sustainable Technology 

Evaluation Program

FUNDING 
All initiatives are currently 
funded.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

103

Strategy, to catalyze community, business, and 
resident actions; 

•  Monitoring, evaluating, and communicating 
the benefits achieved from green and blue 
infrastructure in Toronto and internationally, 
with the aim of prioritizing green and blue 
infrastructure within decision making and 
budgets at the City and for its partners; and 
If required, developing a charter similar to the 
Flooding Charter (see action B1.4) to ensure 
coordination across the City and its partners. 

• 

NEXT STEPS
•  Continue to prioritize implementation of 

Toronto’s Tree Planting Strategy, as well as 
the Strategic Forest Management Plan, the 
Parkland Strategy, and the Ravine Strategy in 
order to protect and expand existing natural 
areas and to establish new ones, and to 
protect and expand the city’s tree canopy. 

•  Continue to prioritize implementation of green 

streets throughout the city.

•  By 2020, establish a framework for 

collaboration on blue and green infrastructure 
to further advance this action.

THE ACTION
Toronto is already undertaking a number of 
efforts to protect and improve existing, as well 
as installing new green and blue infrastructure, 
including the Green Streets demonstration 
projects, the Ravine Strategy, and the Tree Canopy 
Study. The Resilience Strategy aims to support 
and scale up the number of green/blue projects, 
which improve the city’s resilience to climate 
shocks. 

Most comparator cities have a ‘natural 
infrastructure plan’, but given the volume of 
work already underway, the Resilience Strategy 
does not recommend developing a new plan 
or strategy. Rather, in the short term, the City 
should maintain the current working group 
structures on each of the associated green and 
blue infrastructure projects, as these are currently 
making good progress. 

As each of the major initiatives progress, the City 
will identify opportunities to scale up the network 
of green and blue infrastructure, including: 
•  Creating a framework to ensure collaboration 

and coordination for all city wide blue/
green infrastructure with leaders of the 
existing relevant steering committees. Closer 
coordination will improve capacity to measure, 
evaluate and report outcomes overall; 
Finding ways to increase the overall number of 
projects (e.g. more green streets), identifying 
opportunities to integrate green and blue 
infrastructure into larger projects such as 
redevelopments, and linking green and blue 
infrastructure projects into ‘corridors’. 
Identifying new sources of funding or 
partnerships to scale up the number and 
scope of projects, including funding from other 
orders of government, philanthropic funding, 
or innovative financing; 

• 

• 

•  Building on successful multi-stakeholder 

coordination efforts, such as with the Ravine 

104 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

ESSEX PUBLIC SCHOOL, NATURAL ENVIRONMENT AND 
COMMUNITY PROGRAMS

for example, a living 
shoreline provides:

International practice on blue 
green infrastructure

Green and blue infrastructure – sometimes called 
natural or resilient infrastructure – refers to the 
use of nature as infrastructure to meet specific 
goals and service targets, like gallons of storm 
water filtered, storm surge reduction, or heat island 
mitigation. While meeting specific service targets, 
green and blue infrastructure also provides valuable 
benefits to the community and economy that 
the more traditional grey infrastructure projects 
– like roads, pipes, and sewers – do not. These 
additional benefits further enhance community 
resilience and well-being, and increase the return-
on investment to the community. More details are 
in the Building Urban Resilience with Nature report 
from November 2018 by 100RC, which can be found 
here: http://100resilientcities.org/wp-content/
uploads/2018/11/100-Resilient-Cities-and-Earth-
Economics-Building-Urban-Resilience-with-Nature.
pdf

ALIGNED LOCAL ACTION: Fairford Parkette

This public realm project originated with local community concern and action (with a pilot project to 
close the turning lane). The City also identified this site as a priority location for improving traffic flow and 
pedestrian safety. The design became an opportunity to retrofit the site to create a welcoming public 
parkette that collects and treats stormwater runoff from the adjacent roadway through a trench drain 
system.  The right turn channel and traffic island was removed, and the re-aligned intersection now hosts a 
diversity of native species pollinator plants, 10 shade trees, seating for 22 people and 8 bicycles spaces.

FAIRFORD PARKETTE, COXWELL AVENUE AND FAIRFORD AVENUE, CONSTRUCTED 2015

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

105

ACTION B1.6

Promote a sustainable and resilient 
food system

THE CHALLENGE
Sustainable and resilient food systems play a powerful role 
in promoting health, as well as building strong and diverse 
communities, protecting the environment and strengthening the 
economy. Food is especially important in any discussions about 
resilience because it is essential for survival and plays a significant 
role in community development and social cohesion. Within the 
context of climate change, food is a primary sector that can both 
mitigate climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, 
and help adapt to climate change. This is because about one third 
of all GHG emissions are created by the food system, as a result 
of the intensive use of fossil fuels needed to grow food, as well 
as high levels of food loss and waste. The role of food in climate 
change is increasingly being recognized by major international 
bodies such as the EAT-Lancet Commission on Sustainable Diets 
and the International Panel of Experts on Climate change. 

THE ACTION
Building a resilient food system requires addressing both shocks, 
like extreme weather or other emergencies, and stresses, like 
lack of access to resources such as food and housing arising from 
inequity. A food strategy is a vehicle to address both shocks and 
stresses, while helping the City to realize multiple goals including 
social inclusion, economic development, newcomer integration, 
waste reduction, and climate change mitigation by finding ways to 
reduce GHG emissions throughout the food system. 

The City of Toronto has a Food Strategy which works with partners 
to advance a food systems approach of seeing the food system as 
a complex web of interactions and networks. City Council recently 
adopted a high-level vulnerability study of Toronto’s food system 
and tasked Social Development, Finance and Administration, in 
collaboration with Toronto Public Health and other stakeholders, 
to work with vulnerable neighbourhoods to develop food 
resilience strategies. A concerted effort across the food system is 

106 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

COMMUNITY AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

BENEFITS
A sustainable and resilient food 
system

LEAD
•  Toronto Public Health (City of 

Toronto)

KEY PARTNERS
•  Solid Waste (City of Toronto)
•  Economic Development (City 

of Toronto)

•  Office of Emergency 

Management (City of Toronto)

•  Energy and Environment 

Division (City of Toronto)

•  Social Development, Finance 

and Administration (City of 
Toronto)

•  The Toronto Food Policy 

Council

•  Local food organizations
•  Student Nutrition Toronto
•  The Greenbelt Foundation
•  Farmers Markets
•  Experts in urban agriculture 

and green roofs

•  Toronto and Region 

Conservation Authority (TRCA)

FUNDING
A request for funding will be 
made in 2020.

needed to address key vulnerabilities that could impact food access, particularly in neighbourhoods that 
already experience high food insecurity, while also recognizing that food vulnerability is not only income-
related. Seniors, people with disabilities and young children, for example, are all at increased risk. 
To do this, the City will: 
•  Better understand the “last mile” of the food distribution system and overall food environment; 
• 

Incorporate a food lens into emergency planning and climate hazard mapping at the municipal and 
provincial levels;

•  Build resilience of critical food infrastructure, including the Ontario Food Terminal; and
•  Support vulnerable neighbourhoods in planning for and taking action on food emergencies, as 

explored further in A2.1.

NEXT STEPS
•  Work is ongoing to assist the Office of Emergency Management with the integration of a food lens into 

emergency planning.

•  Conversations with the Food Terminal and Government of Ontario regarding back-up power 

generation for that facility are ongoing.

•  Within two years, commission a study to understand the last mile of the food distribution system.

Food Systems Approach

The City of Toronto, through the Food Strategy 
led by Toronto Public Health, uses a food systems 
approach to engage and understand the complexity 
and interconnectedness of Toronto’s urban, regional, 
and global food system. A food systems approach 
acknowledges that an urban food system is a complex 
web of interactions and networks. Food systems link 
rural and urban communities within a country, across 
regions and sometimes across continents. This approach 
is a way of seeing the bigger picture, of developing 
solutions to food problems by seeing and leveraging 
their connections to other health, social, economic and 
environmental connections. A Food Systems approach 
therefore encourages a more holistic understanding of 
access, supply, experience, quality, and affordability. 
Toronto Food Strategy initiatives are influenced by, and 
have an impact upon, a mix of food system elements 
including nutrition, disease prevention, food supply 
chains, healthy food access, social justice, food literacy, 
environmental protection, climate change mitigation, 
and economic development. More information on the 
Toronto Food Strategy, Food Projects, and Toronto Food 
Policy Council can be found at https://www.toronto.
ca/community-people/health-wellness-care/health-
programs-advice/toronto-food-strategy/

FARMER’S MARKET AT CITY HALL

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

107

108 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

RAINING LEAVES AT RIVERDALE PARK, PHOTO BY VANESSA WONG, 
SUBMITTED TO THE SNAP & SHARE PHOTO CONTEST, 2014

GOAL B2: 
Infrastructure and buildings are 
resilient to a changing climate 
and reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions

This goal aims to ensure that the infrastructure the City owns, maintains, and builds is resilient to a 
changing climate; and that buildings built in Toronto are resilient. Sound investment decisions that 
consider the long life spans of infrastructure (up to 100 years in some cases) must be made.

This goal also seeks to embed a holistic approach to infrastructure and land development in daily 
planning processes. Input from community when designing and building infrastructure, especially from 
groups that have historically not been involved in planning processes, improves the quality of assets, 
ensures they meet the needs of community, and improves community stewardship.

ACTIONS
2.1  Develop a Resilience Lens and apply it to City investments, with a 

2.2 

2.3 

focus on infrastructure
Integrate resilience into development and land use planning 
processes
Incorporate climate resilience into the City’s asset management 
framework and plans

We need to think about the future and build 
it into our day to day actions, into the conduct 
of every day.” 

– VISION AND PRINCIPLES WORKSHOP IN SEPTEMBER 2019

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

109

ACTION B2.1

Develop a Resilience 
Lens and apply it to 
City investments, with a 
focus on infrastructure

THE CHALLENGE
Cities can no longer afford to build the same 
infrastructure that suited the needs of the 
20th century. Because public infrastructure 
– in particular roads, bridges, and subways 
– is often intended to last for generations, its 
planning and construction needs to take into 
account multiple challenges, like a changing 
climate and access to housing and mobility. 

Toronto has a long track record of 
developing and maintaining resilient 
infrastructure. One example stakeholders 
often raised in our engagement process 
was the Bloor Viaduct (see pages 48-49). 
More recently, planning for Villiers Island 
was informed by the Villiers Island Climate 
Positive Assessment (see page 95), and in 
2018, the Energy and Environment Division, 
Metrolinx, and other partners worked 
to apply the Federal Climate Lens to 
SmartTrack station development. 

By embedding resilience in the planning 
and design of projects, the City can realize 
several benefits. From a simple cost 
perspective, it can improve value for money 
by reducing future operating, maintenance, 
repair, and disruptions costs. 

The application of a wider resilience lens 
can reduce inequities throughout the 
city by considering the impacts of new 
infrastructure projects on vulnerable 

110 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

HOUSING

MOBILITY

BENEFITS
Major infrastructure projects become more resilient to 
future climate shocks, allowing the City to recover from 
those shocks much more easily and saving it money in 
doing so. 

LEAD
•  Energy and Environment Division (City of Toronto)
•  Resilience Office (City of Toronto)

PARTNERS
•  City Manager’s Office (City of Toronto)
•  Major Capital Infrastructure Coordination Office (City of 

Toronto)

•  Financial Planning (City of Toronto) 
•  Toronto Water (City of Toronto) 
•  Engineering and Construction Services (City of 

Toronto) 

•  City Planning (City of Toronto) 
•  Transportation Services (City of Toronto) 
•  Facilities Management (City of Toronto) 
•  Real Estate Services (City of Toronto) 
•  Solid Waste Management Services (City of Toronto) 
•  Parks, Forestry and Recreation (City of Toronto) 
•  Metrolinx 
•  Toronto Hydro 
•  Toronto and Region Conservation Authority 
•  Toronto Transit Commission

FUNDING
Investment or industry partnership is required to 
develop the Resilience Lens and to learn from other 
cities.

groups, including through the provision of local 
construction jobs, as was done through the 
Community Benefits Agreement negotiated as 
part of the construction of the Eglinton Crosstown 
LRT. The City of Toronto has a 10-year capital plan 
of over $40.67 billion, of which almost half (46%) is 
dedicated to transportation infrastructure.

• 

In 2020, begin piloting the application of the 
Lens to priority projects, while also evaluating 
the process of applying the Lens. 

•  By 2021, work with Financial Planning to 

develop metrics that can be included in budget 
submissions and performance evaluation. 

THE ACTION
The City should improve the resilience of future 
infrastructure projects through the development 
and application of a Resilience Lens to its capital 
and infrastructure planning. The Lens could be 
a tool available for use by City staff and partners. 
The new Lens could be based on the Federal 
Climate Lens, but could also include the City’s 
existing Equity Lens to ensure that both climate 
change and equity implications are considered in 
the planning for all significant infrastructure and 
capital spending projects. 

Since the Federal government’s Climate Lens 
will need to be applied to all federally-funded 
projects, building staff familiarity with the climate 
lens tool will bring the added benefit of improving 
the City’s submissions to federal infrastructure 
funding programs. 

Action B2.3 to implement a climate lens in asset 
management also supports this action. 

NEXT STEPS
• 

In 2019, undertake consultation at the City and 
with stakeholders in the private sector in order 
to apply lessons learned from the use of the 
Federal Climate Lens and technical industry. 
know-how to the development of the City’s 
new Lens. 
In 2020, develop the City’s new Lens and 
conduct workshops and training events to 
build the capacity of staff on resilience and 
how to use the new Lens. 

• 

The Federal Climate Lens

The Federal Government of Canada has created 
a Climate Lens tool, which requires proponents of 
large projects over $10 million to take resilience and 
mitigation into account in project plans. A climate lens 
mandates applicants to federal infrastructure programs 
take into account both resilience and GHG mitigation in 
project design and delivery. 

The resilience component of the lens also includes a) a 
risk assessment process that will reduce risk to public 
infrastructure, and b) the pursuit of multiple benefits, 
such as synergies with greenhouse gas emissions 
reduction.

Equity Lens

The City uses an online Equity Lens tool, which 
guides staff through an equity analysis to support 
the development of policy and other initiatives. It 
helps identify and address barriers that may be 
experienced by equity-seeking communities and 
Indigenous peoples in accessing City services. The 
Lens helps staff when planning, developing, and 
evaluating policies, programs, services or budget 
proposals. It can provide valuable information at any 
stage in the process and can be used by individual 
employees or incorporated into team meetings or 
brainstorming sessions. The Equity Lens online tool 
also generates an Equity Impact statement which is 
required in the budget process.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

111

COXWELL SANITARY TRUNK 
SEWER BYPASS TUNNEL

ALIGNED LOCAL ACTIONS:

Metrolinx Climate Adaptation Strategy
In May 2018, Metrolinx released a Climate Adaptation Strategy, intended to help it run a safe, reliable, and 
climate resilient transit system. It outlines 39 key actions across six business units involved in operations, 
asset management, planning, and the design and construction of new capital projects. It is consistent 
with, and a leading example of, the growing recognition that infrastructure asset owners must adapt to the 
direct and indirect impacts of climate change, and that by doing so they can play a leading role in helping 
communities become more resilient in the face of future extreme weather events.

Toronto Island Gibraltar Point Erosion Control Project  
The Gibraltar Point Erosion Control project at the Toronto Islands is an example of resilience thinking in 
infrastructure design. Gibraltar Point, located at the southwesterly tip of the Toronto Islands, has been 
experiencing erosion since 1879, and in recent years, severe storm events and erosion has led to exposure 
of and damage to existing infrastructure. The goal of the Gibraltar Point Erosion Control project was to 
protect Toronto Islands over the long term so that the Islands continue to be used for recreation and animal 
and fish habitats and critical infrastructure on the Islands are protected (the Island’s Water Treatment Plan 
supplies 20% of Toronto’s drinking water).  The initial proposal was to create a large costly offshore break 
wall to control waves. However, it would have appeared above the water level and was not a popular 
option among Torontonians, as it would have interfered with water activities in the area.  In 2016, the TRCA, 
in collaboration with costal engineers, came up with an alternative, natural infrastructure solution: an 
innovative nearshore reef, designed to halt shoreline erosion while also providing habitat for fish foraging 
and spawning. The project plan also includes beach restoration at Gibraltar Point and has gained public 
support. This natural infrastructure costs nearly half of what the break wall was estimated to cost. 

112 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

ACTION B2.2

Integrate resilience into 
development and land use planning 
processes

THE CHALLENGE
It is critical that municipalities use land use planning to drive 
action on climate resilience. Land use planning policies, like the 
Official Plan and Secondary Plans set out the vision and direction 
for how Toronto should grow. Planning implementation tools like 
zoning bylaws have a formative impact on development and 
the delivery of housing, transit, energy, parks, water, and other 
infrastructure, all of which can build climate resilience. 

This is particularly important in the face of significant growth. 
Toronto has more buildings planned or under construction than 
almost any other city in North America, and, as noted on page 
46 of this document, more than Chicago, Los Angeles, and San 
Francisco combined. 

For Toronto, land use planning has already shaped resilience in 
the city: 
•  Ravines: The devastating impact of Hurricane Hazel in 1954 

led to additional responsibilities given to the Toronto and 
Region Conservation Authority and a regional approach 
to flood control and water management in Ontario. The 
relatively natural character of Toronto’s ravines today is due 
in large part to these protections. Today, the City’s ravine 
system represents 11,000 hectares (public and private land) 
that is enjoyed and protected through various layers of 
environmental policy. 

•  Green development: The Toronto Green Standard sets 
sustainable performance requirements for new private 
development and the City’s agency-, corporation-, and 
division-owned developments. The City’s Green Roof Bylaw 
was the first in North America to require and govern the 
construction of green roofs on large new developments. 

•  The Region: In 2006, the Province of Ontario passed 

legislation that implemented three regional plans that 
continue to shape the Toronto region. Together, the Greenbelt 
Plan, the Growth Plan, and the Big Move (transportation plan) 
guide intensification, inform transit investment at key notes 

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

COMMUNITY AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

MOBILITY

BENEFITS
Future development and land 
use decisions in the city more 
fully take into account a changing 
climate

LEAD
•  City Planning (City of Toronto)

KEY PARTNERS
•  Resilience Office (City of Toronto) 
•  Environment and Energy (City of 

Toronto)

•  Parks, Forestry and Recreation 

(City of Toronto) 

•  Toronto Water (City of Toronto)
•  Toronto and Region 

Conservation Authority 

FUNDING
No funding is currently required.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

113

and corridors, and protect valuable land resources for future generations. The Growth Plan identifies 
targets for residential and employment densities and 25 Urban Growth Centres for particularly high 
levels of intensification through land use planning. Five of these Urban Growth Centres are within the 
City of Toronto. 

These examples and others (see the following page for more details on the new TOcore Downtown Plan’s 
approach to resilience) make Toronto a global leader on resilient land use planning. The challenge for 
Toronto is to continue as a leader. As existing policies are updated and new ones are developed, there 
is an opportunity to significantly advance resilience in the city through innovative and brave land use 
planning. 

THE ACTION
This action is about further advancing climate resilience through land use planning tools. City Planning 
partnered with the Resilience Office to explore the question ‘How can we ensure that Toronto’s growth is 
climate resilient?’ in a workshop in December 2018. The discussion and outcomes will enrich and inform 
City Planning’s work to identify areas where climate resilience can be further advanced. The next steps 
are to ensure that a climate resilience lens is taken in planning work and train and engage staff on climate 
resilience to deepen in-house expertise and capacity to be leaders.

NEXT STEPS
•  Review Toronto’s existing land use policies and implementation tools to identify where climate 

• 

resilience can be further advanced.
Initiate training for City Planning staff and Committee of Adjustment members on climate resilience, 
including stormwater management and protection of natural heritage, and implement training on an 
ongoing basis. 

114 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

JOGGING ON QUEEN STREET IN A 
SNOW STORM, PHOTO BY ERIC SEHR

TOcore Downtown Plan: Resilience

Downtown is particularly vulnerable to a changing 
climate due to its built form and density, age of 
infrastructure, rapid growth and growing electricity 
demand in the face of constrained supply. Severe 
weather events coupled with power outages can 
impact residents living in tall buildings who rely on 
electricity for water supply, elevators, security, heating, 
cooling, and ventilation. 

A decade of unprecedented growth in Downtown, 
along with projections of a near doubling of both 
residents and workers in the core over the next few 
decades, prompted the City to update its Official 
Plan policies. Seizing opportunities that come with 
growth and intensification to leverage investments in 
district energy and other low-carbon energy solutions 
became an important theme of the TOcore planning 
study. 

In July 2018, through Official Plan Amendment (OPA) 
406, Council adopted its new 25-year Downtown 
Plan, pending Ministerial approval. It is a plan that 
gives serious consideration to climate resilience. A 
Downtown Energy Strategy accompanies the plan and 
is designed to encourage investment in the energy 
infrastructure needed to support a more resilient form 
of development. The strategy identifies immediate and 
longer-term actions to improve Downtown’s energy 
performance. It is aligned with TransformTO, the City’s 
climate action plan. 

The policies of the Downtown Plan assign clear and 
strong aspirations to achieve the following planned 
outcomes: 
•  Green infrastructure in Downtown will improve air 

quality, absorb stormwater, minimize the urban 
heat island, expand biodiversity and improve 
human health (3.12) 

•  Downtown will be more resilient to changing 

weather patterns, with improved back-up power 
systems in tall residential buildings to mitigate 
against extreme weather events and area-wide 
power outages. (3.13) 

•  Downtown will contribute to the achievement of 
the City’s energy and emissions targets through 
near-zero emissions development that minimizes 
electricity demand and, where possible, by 
connecting development to the deep lake water 
cooling system and other low-carbon thermal 
energy networks. (3.14) 
The quality of water along the shoreline will 
be improved through reductions of direct and 
indirect wastewater and stormwater discharges to 
Lake Ontario. (3.15) 

• 

Low-Carbon Thermal Energy Networks 

Low-carbon thermal energy networks – such as 
Toronto’s deep lake water cooling system – are 
important in making the city more resilient to climate 
change and decreasing carbon emissions. 
A thermal energy network or district energy system 
distributes energy for heating or cooling to multiple 
buildings at the block or neighbourhood scale. 
It consists of a heating and cooling centre and a 
network of pipes connecting buildings. A low-carbon 
thermal network can use natural gas efficiently to 
begin with, but it also provides the platform for 
integration of large-scale renewable energy sources 
over time. Examples include solar thermal, sewer 
heat, biogas, lake water, biomass and ground-source 
heat. Low-carbon thermal networks connected to 
energy-efficient buildings are the key ingredients for 
near-zero emissions development.

DOWNTOWN CORE, PHOTO 
BY ERIC SEHR

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

115

ACTION B2.3

Incorporate climate resilience 
into the City’s asset management 
framework and plans

THE CHALLENGE
City assets such as roads, bridges, buildings, water, waste 
management facilities, sanitation, natural assets and fleet 
are at increasing risk to extreme weather due to climate 
change. For example, a ‘hotter, wetter, wilder’ Toronto will 
experience significantly more rain. This will strain the stormwater 
management system and put critical infrastructure, like Union 
Station and power stations, at increased risk. 

THE ACTION
The City will improve the value for money of its assets by 
incorporating climate resilience into asset management. By 
taking climate change into account, the City can improve 
planning and avoid additional costs. 

In response to City needs and new Provincial legislation, the City 
of Toronto is creating an asset management policy, framework 
and management plans for all assets, including water assets, 
parks, roads, buildings, and green infrastructure. The intent is 
that the policy and framework will provide a common language 
and can be used by asset managers to develop management 
plans. All of these plans will be rolled up into one corporate asset 
management plan to optimize the value and performance of the 
City’s $94 billion worth of assets. 

The Ontario regulation requires the City consider vulnerabilities 
caused by climate change; anticipated costs from these 
vulnerabilities; actions to address vulnerabilities, including 
related to operations, levels of service and lifecycle 
management; measures to mitigate climate change; and disaster 
planning. 

Finance and Treasury Services is collaborating with asset 
managers to comply with the Provincial regulations by 

116 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

BENEFITS
Increased value for money on 
capital investments because 
infrastructure fares better during 
climate shocks, improved 
resilience to extreme weather

LEAD
•  Finance and Treasury Services 

(City of Toronto)

KEY PARTNERS
•  Resilience Office (City of 

Toronto) 

•  City Planning (City of Toronto)
•  Energy and Environment 
Division (City of Toronto) 

•  Engineering and Construction 

Services (City of Toronto)

•  Toronto and Region 

Conservation Authority
•  Managers of physical 

infrastructure assets

FUNDING
Financial impact of the asset 
management policy to be 
determined through a report to 
Council in 2019.

developing an asset management policy in 2019. Resilience Office will support the integration of climate 
resilience into the policy, framework and plans. 

In 2020, the Resilience Office will provide support in the integration of climate resilience into the asset 
management frameworks and plans.

NEXT STEPS
•  Ensure the asset management policy being developed for Council approval in 2019 requires the City 

to take climate change into account when managing its assets. 

•  Resilience Office will provide support on incorporating climate resilience into in the asset 

management framework.

New Ontario regulations on asset management

The new Ontario regulation on asset management requires that every municipality have an asset 
management policy that includes a commitment to consider: 
• 

The actions that may be required to address the vulnerabilities that may be caused by climate 
change to infrastructure assets, including

A.  operations, such as increased maintenance schedules,
B. 
C. 

levels of service, and
lifecycle management,

The anticipated costs that could arise from the vulnerabilities 
Adaptation opportunities that may be undertaken to manage the vulnerabilities 

• 
• 
•  Mitigation approaches to climate change, such as greenhouse gas emission reduction goals and 

targets, and

•  Disaster planning and contingency funding.

CHERRY BLOSSOMS, BY 
MATT FORSYTHE

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

117

SKATING, PHOTO BY SHAWN 
BRADY, SUBMITTED TO 
THE SNAP & SHARE PHOTO 
CONTEST, 2015

118 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

GOAL B3: 
Toronto has multiple reliable, 
affordable, and safe mobility 
options that reduce the amount 
of time it takes to get around

Throughout consultations with stakeholders and the public, the problem of getting around 
in Toronto was consistently identified as one of the key resilience challenges that people 
experience in their day-to-day lives. This goal aims to improve access to mobility options and 
the experience of getting around in Toronto. 

Torontonians now experience the longest commutes in Canada. Many buses and streetcars in the 
network drive on roads with other vehicles, which affects both reliability and on-time performance. 
For more customers to choose transit, it must be faster, less expensive, and more reliable than 
driving a car. Yet most major streets in Toronto are designed primarily for moving private vehicles, 
not for moving people, and are not designed to enable more sustainable and space-efficient trips 
by transit, walking, or bicycling. There is an economic imperative to addressing this challenge as 
well, because the costs of congestion to Toronto’s economy have been estimated by Metrolinx, 
the C.D. Howe Institute, and others to be between $6 and $11 billion annually, and are anticipated 
to continue to rise. 

Examining the current state of mobility options in Toronto with an equity lens further underscores 
concerning trends. A recent study by the University of Toronto introduced the concept of “transport 
poverty” which occurs when people of low income, poor health, newcomers, or the elderly also 
lack access to high quality transportation options, impacting their ability to access jobs and 
essential services. Many of Toronto’s most vulnerable communities, which exist at the periphery 
of the city, far from the core, suffer from transport poverty and many of the negative health and 
economic outcomes associated with it. 

ACTIONS
3.1  Create a city-wide mobility action plan through synthesis of 

ongoing mobility initiatives and priorities, and identification of 
resilience gaps

3.2   Continue to prioritize service and capital improvements to the 

TTC that make the system safer, more affordable, more reliable, 
and less crowded

3.3  Move more people more efficiently within the existing rights of 

way by expanding demonstration projects

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

119

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

MOBILITY

BENEFITS
Increased capacity for streets 
and the transit system to move 
people, more efficient patterns of 
movement, and increased transit 
ridership, walking, and cycling

LEADS
•  City Planning (City of Toronto)
•  Transportation Services (City of 

Toronto)

•  Toronto Transit Commission 

(TTC)

KEY PARTNERS
•  Social Development, Finance 

and Administration (City of 
Toronto) 

•  Toronto Public Health (City of 

Toronto) 

•  Environment and Energy 
Division (City of Toronto) 

FUNDING
No funding is currently required.

ACTION B3.1

Create a city-wide mobility action 
plan through synthesis of ongoing 
mobility initiatives and priorities, 
and identification of resilience gaps

THE CHALLENGE
In the context of Toronto today, 48% of the City’s census tracts 
are concentrated in low-income neighbourhoods, where 68% of 
residents are visible minorities.1 As shown in pages 52-53 (Equity 
Resilience Challenge), the main ethno-cultural communities 
in these low-income neighbourhoods are all overrepresented 
compared to their share of the city’s population. Contributing to 
the problem of socio-economic segregation is access to mobility, 
particularly for communities in Toronto’s inner suburbs where 
there are limited modes of transit available. Availability of mobility 
options and infrastructure across the city has real implications for 
travel time and experience: Toronto has the highest proportion 
(16.2%) of people who spend more than 60 minutes travelling to 
work in the country, with the majority (75.9%) of whom are public 
transit users.2    

The physical fabric of the city as well as the planning and design 
of civic infrastructure act to proliferate the current systems and 
structures of inequity, allowing some people to access high-
income neighbourhoods, jobs and civic amenities, while keeping 
others out.3 The City and its partners can continue to focus on 
removing barriers and adding incentives to equitable mobility 
options, and improving the planning and design of mobility 
infrastructure. 

THE ACTION
A city-wide mobility strategy would serve to expand mobility 
options throughout the city with the aim of improving access 

1 

2 
3 

S. CONTENTA, TORONTO IS SEGREGATED BY RACE AND INCOME AND 
THE NUMBERS ARE UGLY. (TORONTO: TORONTO STAR, 2018).
STATISTICS CANADA, 2016 CENSUS. (CANADA, 2017).
M. DINCA-PANAITESCU AND A. WALKS, INCOME INEQUALITY, INCOME 
POLARIZATION, AND POVERTY: HOW ARE THEY DIFFERENT? HOW THEY 
MEASURED? (TORONTO, 2015)

120 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

will also encourage ridership and open up access. 
The proposed city-wide mobility strategy should 
include plans, policies, and lessons from other 
cities learning from emerging transit technology 
to prepare for automated vehicles and other 
technological disruptions that produce challenges 
and opportunities for resilience. 

NEXT STEPS
•  An inter-divisional working group has been 

created and initial work on a city-wide mobility 
strategy has commenced.

•  Update the TTC’s service standards to include 

equity considerations.

to vital services and jobs for Torontonians and 
reducing commute times. The development 
of a city-wide mobility strategy presents the 
opportunity for key partners to work together to 
resolve mobility barriers and to support year-round 
access at the scale of the city, neighbourhood, 
and station/stop. The approach to mobility 
equity fundamentally hinges on the planning 
of transit investments, which aim to improve 
historical imbalances in mobility between varied 
communities and focuses infrastructure in areas 
underserved by higher order transit options. 
The proposed mobility strategy should align 
with resilience objectives that prioritize more 
sustainable and space-efficient travel choices such 
as walking, cycling, and transit, and should explore 
innovations, such as smart signal systems. Mobility 
as a service, improved data collection practices 
(e.g., use of travel time readers, etc.), and curbside 
management strategies could work to improve 
the mobility system’s reliability, network coverage, 
and redundancy. Inclusive design practices, such 
as offering higher levels of passenger amenity and 
active-mode connectivity around transit facilities, 

CATCHING THE DUFFERIN 
BUS, PHOTO BY ERIC SEHR

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

121

ALIGNED LOCAL ACTION: 

Some of the key City and TTC initiatives that are aligned with the mobility objectives in the Resilience 
Strategy, and should be considered as part of a new city-wide mobility strategy, include: 
•  Vision Zero Road Safety Plan (2017-2021) focused on preventing and reducing traffic-related deaths 

and injuries on Toronto’s streets, and addressing the most vulnerable users of the transportation 
system; 

•  Rapid Transit network implementation, such as planning for the Relief Line to address capacity and 

network deficiencies, including the need for greater network redundancy; 

•  Surface Transit Priority Plan and Network improvements, such as the Express Bus Network and King 

Street Transit Priority Corridor;

•  TTC 5-Year Service Plan and 10-Year Outlook; 
• 
•  Toronto Walking Strategy (such as building missing links in the sidewalk network and improving 

10-Year Cycling Network Plan and improvements including Bike Share Expansion and other initiatives; 

walking connections to transit stops);

•  New technologies, Curbside Management Strategy, and facilitating Mobility As A Service (such as the 

Automated Transit Shuttle pilot project, the draft Transportation Services Automated Vehicle Work 
Plan, and other initiatives); 

•  Toronto Complete Streets Guidelines and Green Streets Technical Guidelines (such as area-specific 

plans taking a Complete Streets approach and conducting demonstration projects for Green Streets); 

•  TTC service standards updated to include equity considerations;
•  City’s Consolidated Green Fleet Plan, which articulates a collective vision for the operation of almost 

10,000 on-road and off-road vehicles and equipment owned and operated by the City of Toronto 
(including the City’s Fleet Services Division, Toronto Paramedic Services, Toronto Fire Services, Toronto 
Police Services, and the Toronto Transit Commission (TTC)); and

•  Congestion Management Plan (2016-2020), which has an objective to be better at managing 

congestion (e.g. reduce delays, reduce number of stops, etc.) and improve safety through innovation 
and technology that will maximize the efficiency, reliability and sustainability of the road network for all 
users while reducing the impacts on the environment.

122 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

BIKING IN THE 
GATINEAU HYDRO 
CORRIDOR, PHOTO 
BY ERIC SEHR

ACTION B3.2

Continue to prioritize service and 
capital improvements to the TTC 
that make the system safer, more 
affordable, more reliable, and less 
crowded

THE CHALLENGE
Every weekday, about 1.7 million rides are taken on Toronto’s public 
transit system, making it one of the busiest transit systems in 
North America after New York and Mexico City. However, overall 
transit ridership has begun to flat line, even as the city’s population 
continues to boom. Despite huge strides by the TTC in reducing 
subway delays and vehicle short turns, crowding and reliability 
issues continue to plague the system. If the goal is to get more 
people out of their cars and onto the transit system, these issues 
need to be addressed urgently. 

THE ACTION
The TTC’s new Corporate Plan, 2018-2022, lays out an ambitious 
agenda for addressing these continued challenges, and aligns 
well with public feedback received through the development of 
this Strategy. The advancement of these initiatives is imperative to 
the resilience of the City’s mobility system, and should continue 
to be prioritized by both the TTC and City Council. Some of the 
key initiatives from the Corporate Plan that align with the mobility 
objectives in the Resilience Strategy include: 
•  A commitment to advocate for a more sustainable funding 

model around the TTC’s operating subsidy with the ultimate 
goal of exploring fiscal incentives that could make transit more 
affordable and help drive a better balance between walking, 
cycling, driving, and public transit; 

•  An ambitious plan to significantly grow the transit network with 

new subway, light rail, and bus rapid transit; 

•  A modernization plan that includes new, high-capacity vehicles, 
and improvements like Automatic Train control, and one-person 
train operation; 

•  A new metric for service planning, called Customer Journey 
Time, which includes time spent travelling to and waiting for 
transit, as well as time en route; 

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

MOBILITY

BENEFITS
Safer, more reliable TTC 
service, leading to sustained 
ridership growth

LEAD
•  Toronto Transit Commission 

(TTC)

PARTNERS
•  City Planning (City of Toronto 
•  Transportation Services (City 

of Toronto) 

•  Province of Ontario 
•  Government of Canada

FUNDING
To be determined through the 
annual capital and operating 
budgeting process.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

123

•  A plan to reallocate buses to reduce crowding on the busiest routes; 
•  A commitment to exploring ways to increase the resilience of transit infrastructure to flooding, heat, 
and other extreme weather events, which will improve the functionality and usefulness of the transit 
system during a shock; and

•  A commitment to exploring the feasibility of installing platform edge doors to prevent suicides and 

make riding the subway safer.

Also imperative to the resilience of Toronto’s overall mobility system is that the transit system remain in a 
state of good repair. The recent TTC Capital Plan identifies $23.7 billion in unfunded capital investments 
required between now and 2033 to maintain the existing system and drive additional ridership growth. 
This is in addition to the operating costs required to run the system and the significant capital investments 
required for system expansion. It is of critical importance that permanent funding for public transit be 
prioritized by all orders of government.

NEXT STEPS
•  Building on the success of the 5-Year Corporate Plan, the TTC will develop a complementary and 

overarching 5-Year Service Plan and 10-Year Transit Outlook. The purpose of the Plan is to set a vision 
and identify actionable and meaningful transit improvements that will significantly enhance mobility 
and advance the economic, social, and environmental vitality of Toronto.

Mode of travel based on district

NORTH YORK
      6    68 
25 

1

 

ETOBICOKE-YORK
25 

      6    68 

1

 

 

 

     % 

     % 

SCARBOROUGH
25 

      6    68 

1

 

TORONTO-EAST YORK
32 
7   41 
 

           20 
      

 

 

     % 

     % 

 

MODEL OF TRAVEL BY DISTRICT

TRANSIT 

CYCLE

WALK

CAR

DATA RETRIEVED FROM TRANSPORTATION TOMORROW SURVEY 
- MODE OF TRAVEL, BY WARD FOR FULL 24 HOUR DAY, 2016

BIKING IN THE 
LOWER DON

124 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

ACTION B3.3

Move more people more efficiently 
within the existing rights of way by 
expanding demonstration projects

THE CHALLENGE
The need to move more people more efficiently within existing 
rights-of-way is imperative to the long-term resilience of the city’s 
overall mobility system. This is true from a practical perspective, 
but also from a financial perspective, since the cost of improving 
service on existing surface transit routes is far less than the cost of 
building new transit infrastructure. In the long-term, both types of 
investment are needed, but in the short-term, the improvement of 
surface routes will create much more value for money. 

Two recent examples of effective surface route improvements 
are the Richmond-Adelaide Street cycle tracks and the King 
Street Transit Priority Corridor. Both projects have significantly 
transformed mobility patterns along their respective corridors at 
a tiny fraction of the cost of new infrastructure. The installation of 
separated cycle tracks on Richmond and Adelaide alone increased 
the number of cyclists on those routes by up to a factor of 10, of 
which 94% are estimated to be new cyclists. These cycle tracks 
now account for one third of the traffic on Richmond and Adelaide 
during the peak periods in the peak direction, and they carry a 
higher volume of vehicles than one of the regular traffic lanes in 
the peak period, peak direction. The cycle tracks have successfully 
increased the capacity of the roads, while also dramatically 
reducing collision rates, and with minimal impact on vehicle 
travel times. Together with the increased transit ridership that has 
occurred on King Street as a result of the implementation of the 
King Street Transit Priority Corridor, 12,000 additional commuters 
are now being served by the 504 King route every day. This was 
achieved by a combined cost of less than $3 million, while also 
making the affected routes safer and maintaining or reducing 
overall travel time for all users. 

THE ACTION
In partnership with the TTC, the City should build on the success of 
these initiatives by identifying additional routes where similar pilot 
projects can be tested. These new initiatives should be focused on 

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

MOBILITY

BENEFITS
Increased efficiency of existing 
surface transit routes, increased 
transit ridership, increased 
walking and cycling use, and 
better transit access for low-
income communities on the 
periphery of the city

LEADS
•  Toronto Transit Commission 

(TTC)

•  Transportation Services (City of 

Toronto)

KEY PARTNER
•  City Planning (City of Toronto)

FUNDING
Funding to be determined 
and allocated on a route-by-
route basis based on staff 
recommendations and after a 
full study has been undertaken.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

125

suburban arterials where transport poverty and 
inequity in transit investment is experienced, and 
where the impact will therefore be greatest, both 
from a mobility and an equity perspective. 

NEXT STEPS
• 

 The City and TTC to consider this action 
within the planned Surface Transit Network 
Implementation Study.

TAKING THE BUS ON 
COMMISSIONERS STREET, BY 
CECILE GAMBIN

126 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

“We must act and not just plan.”
– PARTICIPANT IN THE VISION AND PRINCIPLES 
WORKSHOP IN SEPTEMBER 2018

FOCUS AREA C:
LEADING A 
RESILIENT CITY

This area focuses on the City of Toronto’s role as the leader 
on resilience for residents, businesses, and partners. It 
includes changing how the City does business to lead a 
more resilient city.

Leading a Resilient 
City

SNACKING AT A CHILD CARE CENTRE 
NEAR DOWNSVIEW-RODING

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

127

GOAL C1: 
Civic engagement and trust in 
the City improve, and leadership 
better reflects Toronto’s diversity

This goal aims to ensure a culture change towards effective civic engagement that builds trust, and 
ensures policy making reflects the reality of life ‘on the ground’ for residents and businesses.

International evidence indicates that civic engagement is a determining factor in how people fare 
in shocks, including whether a household trusts authorities enough to believe information about a 
serious risk, like an extreme weather warning. It is also simply common sense: policies and plans 
cannot break down barriers or promote inclusive growth if the policy processes themselves do not 
properly engage the people and communities facing barriers in the first place. By working to reduce 
the barriers that keep youth, newcomers, and low-income residents from participating in decision-
making processes, more spaces can be created to support diversity and better decision-making. 

The Resilience Office was mandated to ‘pilot new methods to more effectively engage communities… 
aligned with strengthening the City’s overall civic engagement.’ Through that process, residents 
shared how detached they feel from the decision-making process at the City. This came especially 
from the most vulnerable groups who face significant barriers to meaningful civic engagement. This 
leads to cynicism about the positive role of government, and decreases their confidence that the right 
decisions are being made that will ultimately improve their lives. 

ACTIONS
1.1 

1.2  

Expand corporate civic engagement supports to improve 
engagement outcomes at the City
Increase transparency and prioritize communications to improve 
trust in local government

“We participate in consultations. We share our 
thoughts and nothing happens. Nothing changes.”

– TORONTO RESIDENT

128 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

ACTION C1.1

Expand corporate civic engagement 
supports to improve engagement 
outcomes at the City

THE CHALLENGE
Many Torontonians face regular barriers to participation in their 
neighbourhood and City decision-making processes, including 
language, resources, child care, time, and accessibility, which 
can leave them feeling excluded and distrustful of their local 
government as a consequence. Communities cannot truly thrive if 
they feel chronically excluded in this way. 

Many Divisions at the City are at the forefront of civic engagement, 
both nationally and internationally, but this level of excellence is 
not consistent, and there is a need for greater coordination across 
neighbourhoods, communities, and City Divisions. Cities across 
Canada, including Vancouver, Calgary, Edmonton, and Montreal 
all have centralized civic engagement functions that support 
city-wide civic engagement efforts. In Toronto, this function is 
largely decentralized, with some coordination coming from the 
City Manager’s Office, and additional support for Infrastructure and 
Development Services coming from the Public Consultation Unit 
on a cost-recovery basis.

THE ACTION
Divisions should be supported to expand their current civic 
engagement capacity and activities through an expansion of 
the current function within the City Manager’s Office as a larger 
centre of excellence that promotes best practices and supports 
excellence in civic engagement across the organization. This 
would ensure Toronto keeps pace with other Canadian cities 
that are establishing central civic engagement functions and 
investing in tools for public engagement. A strategic approach 
would increase opportunities for Divisions, communities, and 
neighbourhoods to learn from one another, share data, leverage 
coordinated resources, foster better relationships with residents, 
increase value for money, and improve customer service 
outcomes. 

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

COMMUNITY AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

CIVIC 

ENGAGEMENT

BENEFITS
A strong relationship between 
Torontonians and their 
government, and policies that 
are more reflective of the city’s 
diversity

LEAD
•  City Manager’s Office (City of 

Toronto)

KEY PARTNERS
•  All of City of Toronto Divisions
•  Resilience Office (City of 

Toronto)

FUNDING
No funding is currently required.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

129

This expanded function within the CMO should support Divisions by:
•  Providing advice and training on how to carry out exceptional public engagement; 
•  Establishing standards, policies, frameworks, and tools for public engagement that can help to ensure 

greater consistency in Divisional engagement initiatives; 

•  Supporting strategies to improve the engagement of hard-to-reach and equity-seeking groups, 

including low-income, racialized, and Indigenous residents, newcomers, and youth; 

•  Establishing standards for collecting demographic data as part of public engagement initiatives to make 

• 
• 

it easier to track who is being engaged;
Leading public engagement efforts on large projects of city-wide importance; 
Facilitating information and data-sharing between Divisions on engagement and the feedback received 
to improve customer service and make engaging with Torontonians easier and more seamless; 
Improving communication between the public and Divisions to build trust and show how perspectives 
and input are contributing to decision-making; 
• 
Facilitating a community of practice of City public engagement practitioners to share best practices; 
•  Exploring ways to support engagement at the neighbourhood level, with the objective of facilitating 

• 

ongoing and constructive dialogue between the City and residents; and 

•  Continuing to provide supports to residents who want to learn more about how their City works. 

NEXT STEPS
•  The City Manager’s Office will review the City’s civic engagement practices, in consultation with Divisions 

and the public, to consider resources and frameworks that would enhance engagement, reflect 
the unique needs of equity-seeking and other hard-to-reach groups and best practices from other 
municipalities, and include methods for evaluating engagement.

ALIGNED CITY ACTION: Toronto Planning Review Panel

In 2015, Toronto’s City Planning Division created the Toronto Planning Review Panel, a representative 
advisory body of Torontonians convened to provide resident input into strategic projects and policies. To 
ensure that members of the Panel are as representative of Toronto’s population as possible, invitations 
to participate were sent out randomly to thousands of households across the city in what’s known as a 
civic lottery. Volunteers were asked to self-disclose around a series of diversity questions, including age, 
gender, status as either racialized, non-racialized, or Indigenous, and housing tenure. The final panelists 
were then selected randomly from the group of volunteers, controlling for each demographic quality, 
according to its prevalence in the city’s overall population. Panelists receive intensive training on how 
the City works and the planning process, and then provide input over a two-year period into a series of 
planning projects and policy-development initiatives of strategic importance to the Planning Division or 
other City Divisions doing planning-related work. The Panel represents an innovative use of the civic lottery 
process that is now seen as an international best practice. Its benefits extend beyond the high-quality 
feedback that planners get out of it. Panelists also gain extensive educations about how the City works, 
and reported higher levels of interest in City issues, higher degrees of empathy for their neighbours, and 
greater confidence in planning processes as a result of their participation.

130 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

ALIGNED CITY ACTION: Lived Experience Advisory Group (LEAG)

Since February 2017, 17 Torontonians have been using their personal lived experience with the realities, 
conditions, and impacts of living with poverty to inform the effective development, implementation, and 
monitoring of the City’s Poverty Reduction Strategy. 

Hundreds of Toronto residents provided input on how the Lived Experience Advisory Group (the LEAG) 
should work, including composition and terms of membership, frequency and location of meetings, 
communications, audience and tactics, and supports required. More than 350 residents applied to be 
part of the first LEAG. The selected members come from communities across the city and have diverse 
experiences with poverty and intricate knowledge to share. Over the course of a four-year term (2017- 
2020), LEAG members will work together with City Divisions and community partners to address the 
actions outlined in the Poverty Reduction Strategy. The mandate of the LEAG focuses on advocacy, 
education and awareness, and monitoring and evaluation. It is an example of how engagement can be 
tailored towards hard-to-reach and vulnerable populations to achieve better policy and implementation 
outcomes at the City.

PRIDE PARADE 2009, BY 
NEAL JENNINGS

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

131

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

COMMUNITY AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

BENEFITS
A more informed public and 
increased levels of trust in local 
government

LEAD
•  Strategic Communications (City 

of Toronto)

PARTNERS
•  All City of Toronto Divisions
•  Resilience Office (City of Toronto)

FUNDING
No funding request at this time.

ACTION C1.2

Increase transparency and prioritize 
communications to improve trust in 
local government

THE CHALLENGE
City Manager Chris Murray has noted that the main currency of 
government – what it is attempting to earn through the services it 
provides to residents – is trust and confidence. In Toronto, research 
suggests that while local government still enjoys higher levels of 
confidence than other levels of government, it enjoys lower levels 
of confidence than other local institutions (learn more on page 57). 
This was a sentiment that the Resilience Office also heard in the 
context of its consultations for the development of this Strategy. 

A well-informed public increases trust and confidence in civic 
government. The Edelman Trust Barometer, which has been 
measuring trust in 28 countries for 18 years, found that the trust 
index for informed Canadians was 18 points higher than for the 
general population of Canada in 2019. 

THE ACTION
Open and transparent communications is foundational to 
positive public engagement with government. That starts 
with communications leadership. When trust and confidence 
in government decision-making is high, the public are more 
likely to continue to engage with it. Continuously improving 
communications, therefore, is vital to the success and prosperity of 
a city and its residents. 

Government must be accessible, not just physically, but in all 
ways. Toronto is a diverse city; people with disabilities, low income 
residents, and those living in isolation, for example, need options 
and tools to provide input and receive information from their 
government. This could include options that are in the language 
of their choice, that use different technologies, or any other 
interventions that are meaningful to them. 

To achieve this Action, communications resources must be built 
into project budgets with processes established to inform the 

132 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

RESILIE•  Establish a standard for communicating back 

to the public what was heard through civic 
engagement initiatives in a timely way.

 

public, engage on issues, and, critically, provide 
meaningful feedback on how their engagement 
was woven into decision-making. When people 
are well-informed and kept apprised of issues, 
and shown by the government that they’ve been 
listened to, residents are more likely to trust 
that the decisions made by government were 
thoughtful and well-considered, even when they 
don’t necessarily agree with them. 

NEXT STEPS
•  Embed fully-funded communications 

strategies that use innovative communications 
to foster civic engagement and public 
feedback, into all City projects.

ENJOYING THE 
WATERFRONT

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

133

GOAL C2: 
The City prioritizes the most 
vulnerable people and 
highest risk in decision-
making

This goal is about ensuring that the City’s programs and processes include vulnerable 
groups in decision-making, prioritize programs and projects that support equity-
seeking groups, and measure progress in achieving the vision. 

Companies, organizations, and governments are expected to not only be more 
representative, but also more inclusive of people from traditionally marginalized and 
racialized groups. Improving resilience in Toronto requires strengthening the decision-
making processes and systems in place, and addressing how the voices and experiences 
of vulnerable and high risk groups matter at a strategic level in the City. The relationship 
between equity and resilience is discussed further on page 22.

ACTIONS
2.1 

Integrate equity into the City’s strategic planning processes

134 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

ACTION C2.1

Integrate equity into the City’s 
strategic planning processes

THE CHALLENGE
As highlighted on page 35, Toronto is embarking on a number of new 
central strategic planning activities and updating major strategic 
initiatives, including: 
•  A Governance Review, to examine the governing structure of City 

Council; 

•  An update to the HousingTO Action Plan; and 
•  A report on transit expansion priorities for the next decade. 

These central planning initiatives will have an impact on City 
operations. They are expected to address top priority, cross-cutting 
issues such as housing, transit, government modernization, and the 
City’s approach to engaging the public. As such there is significant 
potential for strategic initiatives to address equity and inclusion. 
Failure to purposefully and meaningfully address equity could result 
in outcomes that deepen the divides in Toronto. 

THE ACTION
The City’s strategies will embed equity and inclusion as a priority. In 
addition, the City’s Equity Lens tool should be applied to each of the 
areas of action or recommendations in the strategies (learn more 
about the Equity Lens tool on page 14).

City’s strategies are also a rare opportunity for Toronto to share who 
it is as a city to partners in the region and cities around the world. 
Including equity in strategies sends an important message about 
prioritizing the needs of the most marginalized. It shows that the City 
is alert to the growing inequities and is dedicated to addressing them.

NEXT STEPS
• 

Increase adoption of the Equity Lens tool in City action planning 
and program development processes.
Leverage equity data to foster dialogue among stakeholders and 
inform decision-making.
Integrate an equity responsive budgeting framework during 
planning cycles.

• 

• 

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

BENEFITS
Improved, equitable outcomes 
for all Torontonians in the areas 
prioritized in the strategies

LEAD
•  All City Divisions

KEY PARTNERS
•  People, Equity and Human 

Rights (City of Toronto)

•  Social Development, Finance 

and Administration (SDFA, 
City of Toronto)

FUNDING 
No new funding sources are 
required. The implementation 
of this action requires a 
commitment to integrate equity 
using existing resources.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

135

ALIGNED CITY ACTION: Integrating Equity in Energy and Environment 
Division

The Energy and Environment Division (EED) was recognized in 2018 as leaders in integrating equity 
into their work. EED established an Equity Action Team and worked to ensure an equity lens is applied 
to programs and policy development. EED embedded equity principles into TransformTO, the City’s 
climate mitigation plan. They also provided all staff with multiple training sessions on equity, including 
on the City’s Equity Lens, and the KAIROS blanket exercise on the nation-to-nation relationship 
between Indigenous and non-Indigenous peoples in Canada. 

Improve affordability particularly for vulnerable populations; 

TransformTO’s guiding principles for designing climate action are: 
•  Advance social equity; 
• 
•  Protect low-income residents; 
•  Contribute to poverty reduction; 
•  Enhance and strengthen the local economy; 
•  Maintain and create good quality local jobs; 
• 
•  Create resilient communities and infrastructure.

Improve public health; and 

136 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

SUNSET AT THE DIAMOND, 
BY DANNY MEJIA

GOAL C3: 
Indigenous communities have 
a leadership role in building 
resilience

This goal aims to support Indigenous communities who are taking a leadership role in this work 
to further build the resilience of Indigenous communities in and around Toronto. Broad and deep 
co-development that brings together diverse perspectives and worldviews is required to develop 
novel approaches and diverse ways of thinking to address the urgency and complexity of the 
challenges facing Toronto.

Indigenous communities have essential, far-reaching knowledge and practices relevant to building 
a Toronto in which every resident can thrive. Indigenous communities faced the major shock of 
colonization, including the Residential School system, which has created ongoing stresses around 
language and culture loss, child removal, racism, poverty, inequity and displacement. Indigenous 
communities are experts in long-term resilience. 

Key aspects of Indigenous knowledge that provide an essential framework for resilience actions 
include: importance of interconnectedness, thinking about “all my relations”, including humans, all 
other species, and the earth when making decisions; importance of thinking on a long time horizon; 
and the importance of being dynamic, adapting to new technologies and realities quickly. As one 
participant in the Indigenous Knowledge and Climate Action workshop shared, “Anishinaabe law and 
political systems are for the present and future”.

ACTIONS
3.1  Build relationships with Indigenous communities in Toronto 

around resilience

“We need to ask…how the usual ways of framing 
change needs to better reflect how we live 
together as Indigenous and non-Indigenous 
peoples”

– FROM REPORT ON INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE AND CLIMATE ACTION BY THE 

INDIGENOUS CLIMATE ACTION 

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

137

ACTION C3.1

Build relationships with Indigenous 
communities in Toronto around 
resilience

THE CHALLENGE
To begin to support Indigenous leadership on resilience, the City 
must build meaningful relationships with Indigenous leaders, Elders 
and Knowledge Keepers, and community members based on 
mutual respect and trust. Strong relationships are the foundation 
upon which the City and Indigenous communities could co-create a 
set of actions to further support the goal. 

THE ACTION
The Resilience Office partnered with the Energy and Environment 
Division in 2018 to explore the relationship between Indigenous 
knowledge and climate action through a workshop with Indigenous 
Elders and Knowledge Keepers, and other Indigenous peoples 
working on climate and environmental issues. The workshop 
was led by Indigenous Climate Action, an organization guided by 
Indigenous peoples from communities and regions across Canada 
with the goal to uplift Indigenous worldviews and experiences 
within climate discussions. 

Some of the key responses from participants were that: 
•  The City should do more meaningful Indigenous engagement 

• 

• 

on these questions;
Indigenous views of the world do not have a separate category 
for the environment or the climate;
“Full Cost Accounting” is needed; cities can avoid facing their 
real contribution to overall emissions by not calculating what 
residents consume and how it is produced and imported;  

•  The City should respect and engage meaningfully with 

Indigenous knowledge and practices; not merely as vulnerable 
people, but people with knowledge who have ways to solve 
their own problems and contribute to broader strategies that 
address what is coming;

138 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

COMMUNITY AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

BENEFITS
Better, more innovative, and 
holistic solutions to resilience 
challenges, stronger and 
healthier relationships with 
local First Nations and urban 
Indigenous communities, and 
more knowledgeable City staff

LEAD
•  Resilience Office (City of 

Toronto)

•  Energy and Environment 

Division (City of Toronto)

KEY PARTNERS
•  Indigenous Affairs Office (City 

of Toronto) 

•  Indigenous Climate Action 
•  Native Child and Family 

Services of Toronto (agency of 
the City of Toronto) 

FUNDING
To be determined through the 
annual capital and operating 
budgeting process.

•  The City should find ways to accommodate 

urban Indigenous cultural resurgence, in 
part, because it supports the meaningful 
revitalization of Indigenous peoples’ essential 
contributions on how to mitigate and respond 
to climate change;

•  Engagement with Indigenous communities 

• 

must be inclusive, especially of people 
surviving on low income and living with diverse 
critical symptoms of deep trauma; and
Indigenous people need more urban space, 
specifically, much more access to land and 
water, as a vital way to demonstrate real 
strategies for climate change, which is linked to 
food sovereignty. 

The full summary of the responses is included 
on the Resilience Office website at: toronto.ca/
resilience.

The next step in this action is to continue to build 
relationships with Indigenous communities in 
Toronto around resilience and work towards co-
developing a plan to achieve Goal A3, guided by 
the responses described above. 

To build these relationships, the City must commit 
to reconciliation and acknowledge and foster 
learning about the history of residential schools 
and the harmful impacts caused by the loss of 
land and culture. This includes providing training 
for City staff on Indigenous cultural competency, 
as directed by the Truth and Reconciliation Call to 
Action (#57), and implementing the other seven 
calls to action that City Council identified as a 
priority in 2015. A number of City Divisions are 
already working to respond to these Calls to Action, 
with the Indigenous Affairs Office supporting this 
work across the City. 

In addition to this action, all actions in the 
Resilience Strategy may affect Indigenous 
communities in both predicted and unexpected 
ways. The City will work with Indigenous partners 

We need to ask... how 
the usual ways of 
framing change needs 
to better reflect how 
we live together as 
Indigenous and non-
Indigenous peoples”

FROM INDIGENOUS CLIMATE 
ACTION REPORT ON INDIGENOUS 
KNOWLEDGE AND CLIMATE ACTION

(including Indigenous nations, communities 
and organizations) to identify the impacts on 
Indigenous peoples and work with Indigenous 
communities to ensure they benefit from the 
Strategy and ensure there are opportunities to lead 
the implementation of the Strategy. 

NEXT STEPS
•  Have all Resilience Office staff and resilient 
leads across the City complete Indigenous 
Cultural Competency Training in 2019.

•  Continue to build relationships with Indigenous 

communities in Toronto around resilience and 
work towards co-developing a plan to achieve 
Goal A3, guided by the responses described 
above.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

139

ALIGNED LOCAL ACTION: Nikibii Dawadinna Giigwag

Nikibii Dawadinna Giigwag (Anishinaabemowin for Flooded Valley Healing) is a participatory 
employment training program that includes the voices of Indigenous youth and Elders/Knowledge 
Keepers in the planning and designing of green infrastructure. 

The inaugural program provided four Toronto high school youth and two University of Toronto 
graduate students with summer employment and an opportunity to contribute to the revitalization 
of Bolton Camp, a 254-acre site 40 kilometres north of the city. More than 30 experts mentored the 
students through lectures, workshops, design reviews, guided site visits, and training in the field. The 
program challenged the youth to brainstorm design concepts to transform an existing cabin structure 
at Bolton Camp into a sustainable cabin that will provide Indigenous youth, Elders, and others with 
access to future programming and ceremonial space. 

Phase II of the program will begin in spring 2019 and continue to offer participants the opportunity 
both to explore traditional teachings of the Land, and to learn about potential career paths in fields 
such as architecture and environmental conservation. Indigenous youth will work alongside architects, 
engineers, and Elders/Knowledge Keepers to finalize the detail design of the sustainable cabin 
space at Bolton Camp. Youth will also participate in a variety of environmental training and workshop 
opportunities in the field such as tree identification, invasive species removal, and rain water garden 
design. Such activities will encourage creative problem-solving skills, build environmental literacy, 
foster resident engagement, and contribute to building sustainable landscapes. 

The pilot program was supported with seed funding from the Landscape Architecture Canada 
Foundation and developed collaboratively by Elder Whabagoon; Toronto and Region Conservation 
Authority; the John H. Daniels Faculty of Architecture, Landscape and Design at University of Toronto; 
the Native Canadian Centre of Toronto; and Great Lakes Waterworks Water Allies. Learn more at 
https://trca.ca/learning/bolton-camp-project/nikibii-dawadinna-giigwag/

PARTICIPANTS IN THE NIKIBII DAWADINNA GIIGWAG PROGRAM

140 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

INDIAN RESIDENTIAL 
SCHOOL SURVIVORS LEGACY 
CELEBRATION AT NATHAN 
PHILLIPS SQUARE, OCTOBER 2018

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

141

GOAL C4: 
Institutionalize resilience into 
the City’s decision-making 
and take leadership on 
resilience

The Strategy was developed over the past two years through partnerships with 
organizations and leaders across sectors with the support of a small team in a temporary 
Resilience Office. To achieve the vision of the Resilience Strategy, City Divisions and 
organizations across the city must ensure that their policies and practices actively 
increase collective resilience. City Divisions and agencies need to embed resilience into 
their everyday work and enhance current resilience-building programs. While resilience-
thinking exists informally and varies across City Division or organization, the goal is 
to show leadership on resilience by aligning all City programs towards a coordinated 
approach to planning and investing in the future. 

ACTIONS
4.1   Embed resilience as a practice across the City and partners
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
4.5  Support local partners in academia, industry, and community to 

Integrate climate resilience into TransformTO
Integrate resilience into emergency management
Improve risk management and communication to residents

take leadership on resilience 

4.6  Position Toronto as a regional, national, and international leader 

on resilience

142 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

ACTION C4.1

Embed resilience as a practice 
across the City and partners

THE CHALLENGE
Resilience as a concept can be valuably applied to nearly all of the 
City’s Divisions, agencies, boards and corporations. Embedding 
resilience can improve value for money of City services and lead to 
more equitable outcomes. 

There are challenges in embedding resilience as a practical 
concept; primarily, resilience thinking is long term and strategic, 
and often competes for resources with immediate needs. 
Embedding resilience now saves costs later, such as through 
avoided maintenance or with new financing. However, allocating 
resources to resilience requires prioritization over other priorities 
in the short term. A challenge therefore is to support Divisions to 
first identify and capture opportunities to embed resilience within 
existing budgets and planned projects. 

The Fairford Parkette green streets project (on page 105) is a good 
example of this approach. The project takes advantage of planned 
street works to embed green and blue infrastructure. 

Already, resilience is being integrated across the organization, 
some of which is called ‘resilience’ and some of which has not 
been identified as such. The City is home to some of the most 
exciting resilience projects in the world, with infrastructure projects 
the Don River Naturalization or policy projects such Toronto Public 
Heath’s Food Resilience Strategy. The challenge is to leverage the 
good resilience practice and scale it up.

THE ACTION
The focus for embedding resilience will be to support divisions, 
agencies, boards and corporations to embed resilience in their 
ongoing work. This can be achieved by:
•  Supporting staff and building capacity in the Toronto Public 

Service through workshops and training. The Resilience Office 
and City Planning partnered to pilot this approach (see Action 
B2.2) through the development of a resilience workshop. The 

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

CIVIC 

ENGAGEMENT

COMMUNITY AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

HOUSING

MOBILITY

BENEFITS
Efficient and agile delivery 
framework which breaks down 
silos and scales up resilience

LEAD
•  Resilience Office (City of 

Toronto)

PARTNERS
•  All Divisions as well as select 

Agencies, Boards, and 
Commissions 

FUNDING
Funded through the Resilience 
Strategy. The Resilience Office 
will pursue grants, scholarships 
and innovative financing to 
embed and scale up resilience 
practice in the City.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

143

workshop can be delivered across the City in partnership with the Resilience Office.

•  Creating a network of resilience champions who are already working on resilience. The Resilience 
Office will support a ‘community of practice’ which can share ideas, lessons, and opportunities on 
resilience. A request will be made to Divisions to nominate a resilience champion to participate. 
Requests will be made to partners such as the Resilience Steering Committee to leverage their 
resilience expertise through events, partnerships, or networks. Finally, a request will be made 
to Montreal, Calgary, and Vancouver’s resilience offices to connect the champions with their 
counterparts, to build on the national community of practice (see page 155). The network will support 
breaking down silos across the City. 

The four priority actions in this Strategy will be delivered through multi-stakeholder working groups, 
which include both Divisions, agencies, boards and corporations, and external practice. The Resilience 
Office will act as the backbone to these working groups to ensure that activities are sustained and 
integrated into existing work. This will support embedding resilience by continuing to breakdown silos on 
these four priorities.

To deliver this action – as well as other actions as demonstrated in the work plan on pages 156-157 - the 
Resilience Office will be maintained beyond the end of the 100RC grant. To start, the Resilience Office will 
be extended to the end of 2019. The continuation of the Resilience Office after 2019 will be considered 
through the City’s budget process in 2020 and beyond. For 2020, consideration will be given to 
reorganizing the Resilience Office to be a part of the team delivering TransformTO, as discussed in Action 
C4.2. The Resilience Office will report on progress in one year, focusing on outcomes that:
• 
• 
•  Build capacity in the Toronto Public Service and break down silos;
•  Deliver results on the four priority actions and advance the supporting actions;
•  Access funding for City initiatives through methods such as grants, partnerships, and innovative 

Improve the quality and scale of resilience practice in the City;
 Improve value for money by embedding resilience;

financing;

•  Promote Toronto as a resilient city locally, nationally, and internationally; and
• 

Foster partnerships at the City and with academia, industry and communities in the emerging field of 
city resilience - both to implement the Strategy and to position Toronto as a national and international 
leader in urban resilience.

NEXT STEPS
• 
•  Develop business cases for 2020 budget process required to implement the Resilience Strategy.

Identify and partner with Divisions to deliver resilience capacity-building workshops.

144 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

WALKING IN DUFFERIN GROVE 
PARK, PHOTO BY TOBY PROCTOR, 
SUBMITTED TO THE SNAP & SHARE 
PHOTO CONTEST, 2014

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

145

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

CIVIC 

ENGAGEMENT

BENEFITS
Improved access to funding, 
policy alignment, customer 
service, and climate leadership

LEADS
•  Resilience Office (City of 

Toronto

•  Energy and Environment 

Division (City of Toronto)

PARTNERS
•  Relevant TransformTO 

Divisions 

•  Community partners such 
as the Atmospheric Fund, 
Toronto Environment Alliance, 
and CREW 

FUNDING 
Analysis already funded within 
TransformTO and the Resilience 
Strategy.

ACTION C4.2

Integrate climate resilience into 
TransformTO

THE CHALLENGE
TransformTO, Toronto’s climate action plan, is an ambitious strategy 
to achieve an 80% reduction in Toronto’s GHG emissions from 
1990-levels by the year 2050. It contains an important set of actions 
that will go a long way towards ensuring Toronto plays its part 
in helping Canada meet its obligations under the Paris Climate 
Agreement, which aims to ensure that global temperature increases 
do not exceed 2 degrees Celsius. But even if that objective is 
achieved, the climate change impacts will still be considerable, and 
Toronto’s climate will nonetheless transform in all of the ways that 
this Strategy has already described. That is why cities and other levels 
of government around the world are working to combat climate 
change with a two-pronged approach that incorporates efforts both 
to mitigate climate change (primarily through reductions in GHG 
emissions, as TransformTO aims to achieve), as well as efforts to 
adapt to the effects of climate change, so as to protect people and 
infrastructure from the worst of impacts. Currently, Toronto lacks the 
kind of robust climate adaptation plan that many cities around the 
world are already implementing. This increases the vulnerability of all 
Torontonians to impacts of climate change, puts public investments at 
risk, and will require considerable future government expenditure to 
recover from future shocks. 

THE ACTION
International best practice for municipalities shows that responding 
to climate change requires coordinated action on both climate 
mitigation and adaptation. As detailed in the Climate Resilience 
Framework report (see Resilience Office website at toronto.ca/
resilience for details), it is fundamental to consider mitigation and 
adaptation to identify interdependencies that maximize efficiencies 
and cost-effectiveness, and minimize risk. Merging climate adaptation 
and mitigation together in one climate plan has several benefits: 
•  Customer Service: It is easier for residents, businesses, and other 
partners to understand the City’s climate action through one plan 
which covers both mitigation and adaptation. 

•  Alignment: Pairing adaptation with mitigation aligns the City 

146 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

NEXT STEPS
•  Support the planned TransformTO 

Implementation Plan for 2023 to align with the 
Resilience Strategy.

•  Work with TransformTO to ensure that relevant 

actions, such work on existing building 
retrofits, community engagement, and 
capacity building/training are focused on both 
mitigation and adaptation.

• 

with the Federal Pan Canadian Framework on 
Climate Change, the Provincial Made in Ontario 
Environment Plan, neighbouring municipalities, 
and agencies such as Waterfront Toronto. 
Funding: Considering adaptation and mitigation 
together supports better business cases and 
access to funding opportunities. For example, 
all federally-funded infrastructure projects 
are required to consider both adaptation and 
mitigation (see context on Federal Climate Lens 
on page 111). This is particularly relevant given 
the Province’s decision to cancel the Cap and 
Trade program. 

•  Cost-Benefit Analysis: International best 

practice for cities is to identify, understand, and 
make informed cost-benefit decisions about 
synergies, trade-offs, mal-investment, and 
piggybacking opportunities between mitigation 
and adaptation action. 

SOCCER ON THE FINCH HYDRO 
CORRIDOR RECREATIONAL TRAIL

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

147

ACTION C4.3

Integrate resilience into emergency 
management

THE CHALLENGE
There is an inherent link between resilience and emergency 
management, which both share a focus on the impacts of major 
shocks like storms, floods, and power outages. In Toronto, throughout 
the Strategy development process, the Office of Emergency 
Management (OEM) and the Resilience Office worked as partners to 
deliver projects and policy research. 

THE ACTION
Improving Toronto’s capacity for preparation, response, and recovery 
will be achieved through greater integration of resilience and 
emergency management, as the Resilience Office supports OEM in 
the enhancement and expansion of the existing corporate business 
continuity program and planning process across divisions, agencies, 
boards, and corporations. For example, in 2019 OEM will launch the 
Corporate Business Continuity and Resilience Task Force.

OEM will also play an important role in supporting the development 
and implementation of a Community Resilience Framework, 
Assessment Tool and action planning process (Action A2.1) and in 
enhancing the Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment process 
(Action C4.4).

NEXT STEPS
•  Establish a terms of reference, mandate, and action plan for the 

Corporate Business Continuity and Resilience Task Force.
•  Report to the Toronto Emergency Management Program 

Committee on progress against the action plan on a quarterly 
basis.

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

BENEFITS
Improved preparedness and 
recovery
 
LEAD
•  Office of Emergency 

Management (City of Toronto)

PARTNERS
•  City’s Divisions, Agencies, and 

Boards and Commissions

•  Toronto Emergency 

Management Program 
Committee members 

•  Emergency Management 
Working Group members

•  Business Continuity Working 

Group members

FUNDING 
Funded within 2019 Office 
of Emergency Management 
budget.

148 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

ACTION C4.4

Improve risk management and 
communication to residents

THE CHALLENGE
A foundation of resilience and emergency management is 
understanding, managing, and reducing risk. The primary challenge is 
understanding the possible impact of a stress or shock on vulnerable 
populations as well as taking into account the complex interactions 
of infrastructure and social support systems impacted by stresses 
and shocks such as extreme weather, power outages, and other 
infrastructure failures. 

The City’s existing Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment (HIRA) 
meets Provincial requirements and serves as a useful input to 
planning and policy (including the development of this Strategy). 

The City has also been actively researching the relationships 
between climate risk and infrastructure systems. In collaboration 
with the University of Toronto, the Environment and Energy Division 
conducted pioneering work on this topic in 2012 that was featured in 
a C40 Cities report, “Infrastructure Interdependencies + Climate Risk” 
(2017), found at https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/report_c40_
interdependencies_.pdf. The report establishes the need for cities 
to engage with sectors they do not control but depend upon – and 
which could be at risk due to extreme weather. More work is required 
in this area to better understand interdependencies and the risks of 
cascade failure of infrastructure systems under the triple threat of 
more frequent extreme weather, aging infrastructure systems and a 
growing population.  

THE ACTION
The City can improve how it manages and mitigates risks to shocks 
and stresses, and how it communicates those risks with and to 
its residents and partners. This action is linked to the priority on 
understanding flood risk (Action B1.4), and will be a critical input for 
infrastructure planning (Action B2.1), land use planning (Action B2.2), 
and asset management (Action B2.3). 

The HIRA process will be updated to include climate risk, social 
vulnerability, and critical infrastructure analysis. To be effective, this 

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

BENEFITS
Improved undertaking of risk 
and decision making to invest in 
resilience

LEAD
•  Office of Emergency 

Management (City of Toronto)

•  Energy and Environment 

Division (City of Toronto)

PARTNERS
•  Toronto Emergency 

Management Program 
Committee members 

•  Emergency Management 
Working Group members
•  Energy and Environment 

Division (City of Toronto)
•  The Province of Ontario 

FUNDING 
Investment or industry 
partnership required to conduct 
critical infrastructure analysis. 
Funding sources may include 
the Province of Ontario or 
the Government of Canada 
(including Public Safety 
Canada).

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

149

process needs to draw on the expertise of the 
entire City and its partners. It must also involve 
external and community partners, to ensure the 
analysis is not ‘top down’. Based on lessons from 
other jurisdictions, the work should be phased, 
with the first phase of this work completed in time 
for an update to the HIRA in 2020. Within five years, 
the HIRA should be a live and complete tool, in 
use by all divisions and partners. Recognizing the 
complexity of this assessment, the update may be 
phased, and planning should begin in 2019. The 
City will also engage the Province with the aim of 
leveraging new data from the planned provincial-
level climate change impact assessment.

ACTION C4.5

Support local partners 
in academia, industry, 
and community to take 
leadership on resilience

THE CHALLENGE
Building resilience requires galvanizing the ideas, 
resources, and energy of many. 

Cities and partners across southern Ontario have 
started taking resilience action. For example, in 
southern Ontario alone: in 2017, London hosted 
the ‘Resilient Cities Conference’ to explore how 
their city can be made more resilient; Bancroft, 
Peel, and Carlton all launched resilience 
processes focused on water; and in 2018, Oakville 
launched a neighbourhood extreme weather 
resilience hub. 

Outside government, Toronto Area Interfaith 
Council, with partners such as Faith in the 
Common Good, have provided both leadership 
and on the ground support to prepare for, 

150 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

NEXT STEPS
• 

In 2019, EED will report on its Task Force on 
Climate Related Financial Disclosure (TFCD), 
which could include recommendations around 
the use of HIRA.
In 2019, EED will conduct a series of senior-
level multi-stakeholder “Interdependencies 
Workshops” for internal and external critical 
infrastructure sectors.
In 2019, OEM and the Resilience Office will 
pilot community-level risk assessments in 
Neighbourhood Improvement Areas, as per 
Action A2.1.

• 

• 

respond to, and recover from shocks. The YMCA is 
working to ensure their existing and new Centres 
of Community (health and fitness centres) are 
resilient safe havens for the public in the event of 
extended power outages or other emergencies 
(more on page 152). Toronto Foundation is 
supporting resilience action through its Resilience 
Building Grantees program (more on the work of 
the Toronto Foundation on page 36).  

International evidence on collective impact 
suggests that when addressing complex issues, 
like the resilience challenges identified in 
this report, organizations across sectors must 
develop a common agenda, agree on shared 
measurements, work on mutually reinforcing 
activities, and continuously communicate with 
each other.

There are people out there 
that have solutions we need. 
Nurture them. Leverage them.

-FROM PARTICIPANTS AT THE VISION AND 
PRINCIPLES WORKSHOP IN SEPTEMBER 2018”

THE ACTION
The Resilience Strategy sets a common agenda for resilience 
in Toronto and provides an opportunity to partners to support 
resilience in the city. The Resilience Office will act as the support 
and enabler of collective action in the region. As the next 
step in delivering this action, the Resilience Office will host a 
Resilience Strategy launch event with the University of Toronto’s 
School of Cities in May 2019. This event will invite partners 
from across Toronto and region to share how they will drive the 
implementation of the Strategy and collaborate to drive wide 
scale change. 

NEXT STEPS
• 

Launch the Council-approved Resilience Strategy, led by the 
Resilience Office in partnership with the University of Toronto 
School of Cities and 100RC, with the aim of mobilizing support 
from the academia, industry, and community for resilience. 

Resilience Steering Committee

The Resilience Strategy development has been 
supported by a Resilience Steering Committee of 
community, industry, and academic partners, chaired by 
the Toronto Foundation. The Committee has supported 
the Strategy development with in-kind resources, the 
delivery of resilience projects, and through advice and 
leadership. For example, after the Yonge Street van attack 
in April 2018, the Committee convened to support the 
creation of the TorontoStrong Fund.  

We could do more if 
we planned together!

-FROM PARTICIPANTS AT 
THE VISION AND PRINCIPLES 
WORKSHOP IN SEPTEMBER 2018

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

CIVIC 

ENGAGEMENT

COMMUNITY AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

HOUSING

MOBILITY

BENEFITS
Increase resilience outcomes 
through driving collective action

LEAD
•  Resilience Office (City of 

Toronto)

PARTNERS
•  Communities, industry, 

academia, residents, and 
businesses

FUNDING
No funding required. The 
City aims to connect external 
partners working on resilience to 
funding opportunities.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

151

ALIGNED LOCAL ACTION: YMCA Resilience Action

The YMCA of Greater Toronto is working to increase community resiliency and protect vulnerable 
populations. The YMCA recognizes its important role in supporting and enhancing community resilience and 
has developed its own Resiliency Strategy to guide this effort. The YMCA’s Strategy helps apply a climate 
resilience lens to strategic actions and priorities. 

As part of this Strategy, the YMCA plans to turn existing and new Centres of Community (health and fitness 
centres) into Community Resiliency Centres. This would allow the YMCA Centres to generate their own 
electricity on-site and continue to support the community even if the electricity grid is compromised in 
an emergency. This will be accomplished by installing high-efficiency combined heat and power energy 
systems. The YMCA will also integrate other resilience-building and low-carbon microgrid measures 
including solar panels, battery energy storage systems, electric vehicles chargers, advanced controls, and 
backup generators where combined heat and power energy system are not possible. 

These investments will increase the resilience of communities throughout the region by providing the pubic 
with safe havens in the event of power outages and other emergencies while providing safe and reliable 
command centers for first responders.

152 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

SKATING AT NATHAN PHILLIPS SQUARE, PHOTO BY RICHARD K LAKE, 
SUBMITTED TO THE SNAP & SHARE PHOTO CONTEST, 2015

ACTION C4.6

Position Toronto as a regional, 
national, and international leader on 
resilience

THE CHALLENGE
The action Toronto has taken and will take through implementing 
this Strategy will improve the City’s attractiveness to international 
investment. There are also economic development opportunities 
within the practice of resilience: Rotterdam’s ‘waterpark’ project 
welcomes over 80 foreign delegations each year. Toronto has 
an opportunity to build on strong areas of innovation and to 
communicate success stories. For instance, Toronto had the most 
square footage of green roofs installed out of all North American 
cities in 2016 – a successful track record due in large part to the 
Green Roof Bylaw (2010). With investors and cites around the 
world embracing resilience, Toronto has an opportunity to position 
ourselves as a global leader. 

THE ACTION
A work plan will be created to identify, on an ongoing basis, the 
following: 
•  How to best position Toronto’s resilience in terms of investment 

attractiveness; 

•  Gaps in the city’s resilience capacity or the perception of 

Toronto and how to address them; 

•  A shortlist of international or national events or conferences 
Toronto may host to position Toronto as a global leader; and 

•  How to best engage with other Ontario and Canadian 

municipalities to support a wider uptake of resilience in Canada. 

NEXT STEPS 
• 

Identify opportunities to continue or scale up cooperation 
between Canadian cities on resilience.

•  Participate in the 2019 Global Resilience Summit, hosted by 

100RC.

RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

EQUITY

CLIMATE AND 
ENVIRONMENT

CIVIC 

ENGAGEMENT

COMMUNITY AND 
NEIGHBOURHOODS

HOUSING

MOBILITY

BENEFITS
Economic development 
opportunities from being a 
global resilience leader 

LEAD
•  Resilience Office (City of 

Toronto)

PARTNERS
•  Economic Development and 

Culture (City of Toronto) 

•  Strategic Communications 

(City of Toronto) 

FUNDING 
None currently required.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

153

INTRIGUING GAME, BY 
PHIL MARION

ALIGNED LOCAL ACTION: Circular Economy

One of the ways Toronto is already taking a leadership role on resilience is through 
the City’s commitment to work towards an aspirational goal of zero waste and a 
Circular Economy. A Circular Economy aims to reduce waste and maximize resources 
by moving away from the linear take-make-and-dispose approach to an innovative 
system that focuses on product longevity, renewability, and reuse and repair.

The City has created a team to support this commitment and one of the first steps 
has been looking at how the City can use its purchasing power to develop Toronto’s 
circular economy.

A city with a circular economy is a resilient city; the sustainable use of resources 
at their fullest value can drive the local economy, increase social prosperity and 
have better environmental outcomes. With a stronger focus on product longevity, 
renewability, reuse, and repair, a circular economy can decrease risk associated with 
reliance on primary raw material extraction costs and impacts to the environment.

Circular Economy principles can also be integrated into many of the Resilience 
Strategy actions, including the promotion of sustainable and resilient food systems 
(Action B1.6) and integration of climate resilience into the City’s asset management 
framework and plans (Action B2.3). Learn more at https://www.toronto.ca/services-
payments/recycling-organics-garbage/long-term-waste-strategy/working-toward-
a-circular-economy/

154 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

Resilient Cities Across Canada

Toronto is one of four Canadian cities participating in the 100RC network, with 
Montreal, Calgary, and Vancouver. Starting in 2016, the four member cities began 
developing resilience strategies. The purpose of convening is to bring together 
resilience practitioners to:

a) Advance and illuminate the state of urban resilience in Canada. 

The four Canadian member cities of the 100RC network each have unique 
challenges and opportunities – the diversity of urban centers and metropolitan 
areas is vast in Canada. Each of the Chief Resilience Officers are leading their cities 
through a transformational process to institutionalize resilience in operations and 
partnerships. 

b) Share emerging learnings, best practices, and innovations. 

The network has also been beneficial for sharing learnings and best practices 
leading to the development of a resilience strategy. 

c) Connect with national and international practitioners and thinkers to advance 
urban resilience in Canada. 

Municipal governments alone cannot build resilience in communities – it takes 
great partnerships, new technologies, resources, and leadership. Leading experts 
have insights on a wide range of topics including urban modelling, strategic 
foresight, risk profiling tools, future of work in Canada, Truth and Reconciliation, and 
more.

d) Begin conception of a national Urban Resilience Agenda for Canada. 

A national urban resilience agenda would benefit the many Canadians living in 
cities. Opportunities are being explored for national engagement and national 
impact, cross-city solutions, and new philanthropic investment in a pan-Canada 
initiative. 

ENJOYING THE PATIO 
IN LITTLE ITALY

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

155

Action Plan

An action plan to address immediate priorities and to embed resilience.

FOCUS AREA 

                 ACTION     

1.1
1.2
1.3
2.1
3.1

1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
2.1
2.2
2.3
3.1
3.2
3.3

1.1
1.2
2.1
3.1
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6

Support homeowners and renters to prepare their homes for shocks

Enable wide-scale change in apartment towers to improve resilience through the improvement or retrofit of 
apartment towers and units
Apply a resilience lens to the development of the new HousingTO 2020-2030 Action Plan & ensure 
comprehensive action to address Toronto’s affordable housing gaps across the full spectrum of need
Enhance the capacity of neighbourhoods to prepare for and recover from shocks through grassroots 
action and network building
Prioritize the implementation and resourcing of the Council-approved Toronto Poverty Reduction Strategy

Institutionalize an integrated, resilience approach to flooding by adopting the Flood Resilient Toronto Charter

Centralize resources towards a city-wide flood planning and prioritization tool

Review and update existing flood mitigation programs to account for resilience

Take action to mitigate the effects of extreme heat

Communicate, synthesize and scale up ongoing City efforts to advance a system of green and blue infrastructure

Promote a sustainable and resilient food system

Develop a Resilience Lens and apply it to City investments, with a focus on infrastructure

Integrate resilience into development and land use planning processes

Incorporate climate resilience into the City’s asset management framework and plans

Create a city-wide mobility action plan through synthesis of ongoing mobility initiatives and priorities, 
and identification of resilience gaps
Continue to prioritize service and capital improvements to the TTC that make the system safer, more 
affordable, more reliable, and less crowded
Move more people more efficiently within the existing rights of way by expanding demonstration projects

Expand corporate civic engagement supports to improve engagement outcomes at the City

Increase transparency and prioritize communications to improve trust in local government

Integrate equity into the City’s strategic planning processes

Build relationships with Indigenous communities in Toronto around resilience

Embed resilience as a practice across the City and partners

Integrate climate resilience into TransformTO

Integrate resilience into emergency management

Improve risk management and communication to residents

Support local partners in academia, industry, and community to take leadership on resilience

Position Toronto as a regional, national, and international leader on resilience

156 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

ABCThe Strategy includes four priority actions which each address immediate needs and 
build on existing investments by the City and partners. 

Implementation Milestones

2019 

 

 

       2020 

 

        2021

LEAD

Resilience Office

Resilience Office 

Affordable Housing Office

Resilience Office & SDFA

Poverty Reduction Strategy Office

Resilience Office 

Resilience Office

Resilience Office & Toronto Water

Toronto Public Health

Resilience Office

Toronto Public Health 

EED & Resilience Office

City Planning

Finance and Treasury Services  

City Planning, Transportation Services & TTC

TTC

TTC & Transportation Services

City Manager’s Office  

Strategic Communications

All City Divisions   

Resilience Office & EED  

Resilience Office

Resilience Office & EED

OEM  

OEM & EED

Resilience Office

Resilience Office

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

157

The quotes throughout this document were provided by residents and used with their 
permission. Some have been edited for brevity and clarity while preserving the meaning.

All photos without attribution are copyright City of Toronto.

158 

Toronto Resilience Strategy

CAMPFIRE ON TORONTO 
ISLAND, PHOTO BY ERIC SEHR

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

ACORN Canada
AET Group: Environmental Consulting
Affordable Housing Office
Agincourt Community Services Association
Arcadis
Bang The Table
Black Creek Community Health Centre
Boys and Girls Club of East Scarborough
BOMA Toronto
C40
Canadian Urban Institute
Centre for Connected Communities 
Chief Transformation Officer
City Planning
Civic Innovation Office
Clean Air Partnership
Community Action Planning Group
Community Resilience to Extreme Weather 
Conservation Ontario
Converso
Deltares
Deputy City Manager - Internal Corporate Services
East Scarborough Storefront 
Economic Development and Culture
Employment and Social Services
Engineering and Construction Services
Environment and Energy Division
ERA Architects
Centre for Urban Growth + Renewal
Evergreen
EY
Facilities Management
Financial Planning
Fleet Services
Indigenous Climate Action
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
Institute of Municipal Finance and Governance
Insurance Bureau of Canada
Leah Birnbaum Consulting
Lossless Creative
Metrolinx
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (MOECC)
MJKO
Morrison Park Advisors
Municipal Licensing and Standards
Native Family and Child Services

North York Community House
OCAD University
Office of Emergency Management
Parkdale Activity Recreation Centre
Parks, Forestry and Recreation
Perkins + Will
Progress
Rexdale Community Health Centre
Ryerson University
Scadding Court Community Centre
Social Development Finance and Administration
Social Planning Toronto
Solid Waste Management Services
Strategic and Corporate Policy
Strategic Communications
Sustainability Solutions Group
TAS Designs
The Neighbourhood Organization
Thorncliffe Neighbourhood Office
Thorncliffe Park Women’s Committee
Toronto Aboriginal Support Services Council
Toronto Building
Toronto Community Housing Corporation
Toronto Environmental Alliance
Toronto Financial District Business Improvement Area
Toronto Foundation
Toronto Hydro
Toronto Public Health
Toronto Public Library
Toronto Region Board of Trade
Toronto Region Conservation Authority
Toronto Transit Commission
Toronto Water
Toronto Youth Cabinet
Transportation Services
United Way
University of Toronto
Urban Land Institute
Waterloo Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Watervision
Wellesley Institute
YMCA of Greater Toronto
York University
Zahra Ibrahim

For updates, check out toronto.ca/resilience.

Toronto Resilience Strategy 

159

The postcards featured on the cover are a selection of the 
more than 200 postcards received as part of an extensive 
campaign to collect Torontonians’ stories of resilience. They 
helped to inform the contents of this Strategy.

