Montréal’s Resilient  

City Strategy 

Montréal’s Resilient  

City Strategy 

        URBAN RESILIENCE 
REFERS TO THE 
CAPACITY OF A CITY’S 
PEOPLE, COMMUNITIES, 
INSTITUTIONS, 
BUSINESSES AND 
SYSTEMS TO SURVIVE, 
ADAPT AND GROW, 
REGARDLESS OF THE 
TYPES OF CHRONIC  
STRESSES AND 
ACUTE SHOCKS 
THEY EXPERIENCE.

REFLECTIVE
RESOURCEFUL
ROBUST
REDUNDANT
FLEXIBLE
INCLUSIVE
INTEGRATED

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Message from the Mayor 

Message from the Director of Resilience 

Message from the President of 100 Resilient Cities 

1  Why an Urban Resilience Strategy? 
  1.1  Relevance 
  1.2  Scope 
  1.3  Building on what exists 
  1.4  Issues and challenges related to resilience in Montréal 

2  Background 
  2.1  About the program 
  2.2  Montréal and the program 
  2.3  Ties with other cities in the network 
  2.4  Montréal’s urban resilience approach 

3  Montréal’s Resilient City Strategy 
  3.1  Vision for Montréal 
  3.2  Mission of the Bureau de la résilience 
  3.3  Orientations and objectives for a resilient city 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ORIENTATION 1  
Take action to support a united and safe community 
ORIENTATION 2 
Take action to protect our living environement 
ORIENTATION 3 
Take action to maintain a diversified and innovative economy 
ORIENTATION 4 
Take action to promote integrated governance in the service of the community 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4  Implementation 

Photos cover and back © Getty Image  
Other photos © Myriam Baril-Tessier

In this document, the masculine gender indicates both sexes, with no discrimiation intended.

9

10

11

12 
13 
13 
14 
16

18 
18 
18 
19 
20

22 
23 
24 
25 

26 

34 

40 

48

56

 

d
r
a
r
i
G
n
i
t
r
a
M
©
o
t
o
h
P

 

 

MESSAGE FROM THE MAYOR

Montréal became the first Canadian city to join the 100 Resilient Cities program in December 2014, 
chosen by the New York-based Rockefeller Foundation, a major philanthropic organization. Our metropolis 
thus aligned itself with the cities of Sydney, London, Paris, Singapore and Barcelona. Toronto, Calgary and 
Vancouver quickly followed suit and helped to form a working group on best practices in resilience.

This prestigious international network has a mission to improve the resilience of cities, which today face 
growing environmental, social and economic challenges. 

To build on this momentum, Montréal created its Bureau de la résilience in May 2016. The Bureau’s chief 
objective is to develop the Urban Resilience Strategy announced today. 

Montréal’s Resilient City Strategy is geared to all Montrealers. It will allow our city to better adapt to 
the challenges and contingencies it is called upon to deal with while continuing to develop. At the same time, 
the Strategy will allow the population, institutions, companies and essential systems to better react and stand 
up to contingencies.

With this Strategy, the municipal administration hopes to improve its capacity to anticipate, prevent and adapt 
to the problems and risks that could impact Montrealers. We’re adopting the tools to improve our response 
to events, such as a natural catastrophe, a tragedy or an attack, and to situations likely to render the city 
vulnerable, such as the aging of the population, social exclusion, poverty, and deteriorating infrastructures. 

As a member of the 100 Resilient Cities program, Montréal intends to foster a discussion with other world cities 
concerning the urban challenges posed by living-together and the fight against social exclusion and isolation.

This Strategy calls for an initial five-year action plan intended to improve the capacity of the city and all its 
partners to deal effectively with disturbances. 

Our municipal administration will take action to establish a unified and safe community, protect our living 
environment, maintain a diversified and innovative economy, and promote integrated governance in the 
service of the community. 

Valérie Plante 
Mayor 
Ville de Montréal

9  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

Photo © Daniel Marchand

MESSAGE FROM THE CHIEF RESILIENCE OFFICER

In the last two years, the team at the Bureau de la résilience has 
consulted citizens, city employees, researchers, emergency measures 
managers, and representatives of community-based organizations 
and business leaders in an effort to develop a proactive approach to 
meeting challenges across its territory. This vital collaboration marked 
the start of a progressive process meant to allow Montréal and 
Montrealers to strengthen their resilience capacity.

In order to adapt to the challenges of the 21st century, we must 
collectively improve our understanding and anticipation of climate 
issues as well as social, technological and economic issues. It’s 
important, as well, that we learn to better prepare for disturbances, 
regardless of their nature.

Across the world, catastrophes are increasingly intense and complex. 
In 2017, Montréal bore the full brunt of severe weather events. 
Montrealers, in particular, demonstrated their solidarity during the 
spring floods that struck the north-west of the island, and certain 
vulnerabilities remain. This year marks the 20th anniversary of the 
Ice Storm, and our city must continue to improve its adaptation and 
prevention capacity in the face of disruptive events, supported by 
a comprehensive vision of civil security issues.

With this Strategy, the municipal administration is seizing the 
opportunity presented by the 100 Resilient Cities initiative to 
promote the further development of resilience capacity among 
Montrealers, within the city, and in organizations and companies that 
play a key part in the city’s development.

Montréal’s Resilient City Strategy is not an end in itself – quite the 
contrary! All citizens are invited to take part in this urban resilience 
process, which we hope will lead us, collectively, towards a safer, 
more equitable and sustainable society.

Louise Bradette 
Chief Resilience Officer 
Ville de Montréal

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  10      

MESSAGE FROM THE PRESIDENT 
OF 100 RESILIENT CITIES

On behalf of 100 Resilient Cities – Pioneered by The Rockefeller 
Foundation (100RC), I want to congratulate Mayor Valerie Plante, 
Chief Resilience Officer Louise Bradette, and the City of Montréal on 
the release of the city’s and Canada’s first Resilience Strategy. 

When we chose Montréal to join the 100RC Network, we saw a city 
poised to address its vulnerability to chronic stresses and acute shocks 
through more integrated, sustainable planning, while fostering a city 
more resilient to the known and unknown challenges of the 
21st Century. Since then, we have seen a city primed to serve as a 
model of resilience for other cities in Canada and around the world.

Montréal’s resilience was both tested and on full display in May 2017, 
when the city and surrounding communities experienced historic, 
powerful flooding that displaced thousands. The flood underpinned 
the importance of Montréal’s focus on urban resilience. Montréal had 
not been tested like this in nearly 20 years and with resilience in mind 
the city is now using the lessons from this to shape future actions and 
investments, for this and other potential threats. 

The priorities contained in this Strategy reflect the city it serves. 
By emphasizing community resilience, Montréal will build citizen 
preparedness and social cohesion, leveraging the city’s rich history 
of diversity. By focusing on risk awareness and prevention, the city 
will leverage the work of partners like Wood and the 2017 flood to 
better enable the city to thrive in good times and bad. And through 
a focus on critical infrastructure, Montréal will better understand 
the opportunities for instituting multiple benefits into infrastructure 
investments to ensure efficient, resilient infrastructure that serves all 
of the city’s residents. 

Importantly, this Strategy exhibits how resilience thinking enables a city 
to break down siloes and integrate priorities across city government. 
We have and will continue to be a proud partner in the city’s efforts to 
build a more resilient city. Along with fellow 100RC Network members 
Calgary, Toronto, and Vancouver, we are excited to see the practice of 
urban resilience take root in Canada with this first step.

Michael Berkowitz 
President of 100 Resilient Cities – 
Pioneered by 
The Rockefeller Foundation

11  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

WHY AN 
URBAN RESILIENCE 
STRATEGY?

STRATÉGIE MONTRÉALAISE POUR UNE VILLE RÉSILIENTE  I  JUIN 2018  I  12      

1.1 RELEVANCE

Because the city, as an organization, plays a preponderant role at the local level, it is crucial that it meet 
the needs and expectations of its citizens and be the first to take action in emergency situations. The city, 
today, wishes to improve its capacity to anticipate, prevent and adapt to problems and risks likely to affect 
Montrealers as well as Montréal’s assets and development. The municipal administration also intends to 
heighten awareness among citizens and business managers across the city of the importance of  
developing their state of preparedness in order to better deal collectively with shocks (earthquakes, floods,  
critical infrastructure breakdowns, etc.) and stresses (climate change, poverty/social inequality, aging 
infrastructures, etc.).

Resilience has been identified, in recent years, as a quality that’s essential to promoting the capacity of cities 
to deal with events and threats. While the city already has programs that, directly and indirectly, help make 
Montréal more resilient, there was a clear need to adopt a formal resilience strategy. This strategy will lend 
it a more comprehensive vision of current vulnerabilities, with an improved capacity to anticipate future 
vulnerabilities, and an integrated and efficient action plan geared to the specific challenges we face.

 
1.2 SCOPE

Montréal’s Resilient City Strategy constitutes an ambitious initial proposal for Montréal. Using the citizen as 
its starting point and then shifting its focus to the Montréal community, the municipal administration, and 
ultimately to public and private organizations, this strategy broadly reflects a global movement towards 
resilience. This movement recognizes the necessity of pooling our efforts across all spheres of society in order 
to make cities more resilient. Montréal’s Resilient City Strategy is thus geared to all Montrealers. An initial 
five-year action plan sets out four major orientations and 12 objectives.

13  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

1.3 BUILDING ON WHAT EXISTS

Montréal is a dynamic and innovative city where the municipal administration, urban development actors, 
community stakeholders and business people are invested and involved in planning. As a result of these efforts, 
numerous initiatives – plans, programs, strategies and policies – have been put in place and are exerting 
a positive impact on the city’s resilience. These actions were compiled and analyzed during Phase 1 of the 
development of the strategy. A synthesis was presented in the Preliminary Resilience Assessment issued in 
February 2017.

The municipal administration has put forward new actions since the publication of the Preliminary Resilience 
Assessment. The city’s first Social Development Policy, called Montréal de tous les possibles, is intended to meet 
challenges in the following areas:

•  Poverty and demographic changes 
•  Educational success and employment 
•  The transformation of neighbourhoods 
•  Living-together and the fight against social exclusion, isolation and discrimination

The City manager signed the Administrative Policy on Business Continuity formalizing the development 
and deployment of the business continuity program across all municipal departments and inviting boroughs 
to comply. The business continuity approach is based on four main development principles:

•  Responsible management 
•  State of preparedness 
•  Response capacity 
•  Organizational resilience 

In March 2018, the municipal administration also presented its new Master Plan for Sports and Urban 
Recreation aimed at creating environments favourable to a physically active lifestyles among Montrealers. 
The plan focuses on connectivity with the goal of improving access to parks, public places, pedestrian streets, 
playgrounds and playing fields for all Montrealers. It is intended, specifically, to:  

•  Adapt the offer of summer and winter recreational activities to climate change; 
•  Promote greater universal access; 
•  Integrate the urban sports and outdoor recreation network into the smart and digital city strategy.

Finally, the 2017-2022 Cultural Development Policy uses the power of culture as a lever of social cohesion 
and economic development. It revolves around three major projects:

•  Cultural and creative entrepreneurship for sustainable creation 
•  Digital technology promoting cultural experiences for citizens 
•  Living-together integrated into the fabric of cultural quarters

All city programs, paired with initiatives by companies and by academic and community stakeholders, 
are the building blocks of urban resilience in Montréal. The Urban Resilience Strategy is thus aimed at 
consolidating these cornerstones by offering complementary projects in areas not covered to the same 
extent by these actions.

This document thus integrates key elements of the main plans and policies adopted by the city in recent years, 
presenting new actions meant to meet challenges of resilience facing Montréal and Montrealers in the short, 
medium and long term. 

 

 

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  14      

15  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

1.4 ISSUES AND CHALLENGES RELATED TO RESILIENCE  
 

IN MONTRÉAL  

The resilience of Montréal and Montrealers has long been put to the test by 
various challenges and disturbances. Often provoked by the climate context and 
the island’s geographical location, but also by economic and sociopolitical factors, 
these issues are destined to become more complex with accelerated technological, 
climate and demographic change. Montréal’s inclusion in the 100 Resilient Cities 
program was spurred by a desire to improve the city’s capacity to deal with 
the shocks and stresses. This program recognizes the importance of developing 
Montréal’s capacity to go beyond a reaction response to emergency situations. 
As well, the city must better understand the impact of stresses in the event of a 
shock, and how to mitigate these impacts in a preventive manner. These are the 
challenges Montréal will be called upon to deal with through the implementation 
of its strategy.
The exceptional floods that struck the north-west of the island of 
Montréal in April and May of 2017 tested Montrealers’ collective resilience. The 
city has drawn lessons from that experience and has initiated a review process 
in collaboration with its external partners. The 1998 Ice Storm, until recently, 
remained the greatest shock that Montréal had ever sustained. The events of 2017 
prompted a renewed focus on our vulnerability to natural hazards, particularly 
those arising from climate change. They also shed light on the importance of 
joint action in support of resilience by all levels of government, together with the 
appropriate land use management and environmental protection efforts.  
Industrial and technological risks, particularly those related 
to the transportation and storage of dangerous goods across the city, represent 
another a source of growing concern to municipal authorities. The transportation 
of dangerous goods is a fast-growing business in North America, owing to 
the intensification of gas and oil production in the United States and Western 
Canada. The Lac-Mégantic disaster of 2013 and the explosion of a tank truck on 
autoroute 40 in Montréal in August 2016 served as tragic reminders of the risk 
of transporting these materials through urban environments. Recent pipeline 
reversal and construction projects also awakened the collective consciousness of 
the risks associated with spills and contamination. The storage of dangerous goods 
used daily by industries and businesses in Montréal also entails its share of risks 
to residents, businesses and surrounding ecosystems. These must be taken into 
account in current and future land use planning across Montréal, while striking a 
balance between economic, environmental and safety imperatives

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  16      

The risk of a terrorist attack is also an issue for Montréal, just as it is for cities all across the world. 
Recent attacks in Europe and the United States, but also, closer to home, in Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu (2014), 
at Parliament Hill in Ottawa (2014) and a Québec City mosque (2017), as well as cases of radicalization in 
Montréal and beyond, have placed populations and authorities in a state of alert. This new reality raises 
several challenges, including the need to better understand youth radicalization and effectively coordinate the 
response to a potential terrorist attack, while striking a balance between rights, liberties and public security. 
Montréal’s resilience, in this context, may be supported by greater awareness of this risk among Montrealers, 
improved preparedness on the part of its administration and organizations, and the development of a civic 
culture of inclusion and solidarity.

AIn addition to real and potential shocks, a number of added stresses also affect Montréal, exerting a 
significant impact on the well-being of the city’s population, both on a daily basis and in emergency situations.  
Poverty and social inequality, the aging of the population, the impacts of climate change 
and road congestion, among others, have an impact on Montrealers and their resilience potential. Certain 
vulnerabilities are insidious and can serve to compound the impacts of a shock. Such was the case in 2000, 
when a shortage of rental housing in Montréal mushroomed into a bonafide housing crisis in 2001 and 2002, 
resulting in the occupants of more than 60 mainly poor households being turfed out onto the street. The 
municipal administration and its community-based partners have learned to better assess and anticipate this 
stress. Programs are in place to react to a future housing crisis in Montréal and protect the city’s vulnerable 
populations. The massive influx of refugee and asylum seekers across Montréal between 2015 and 2017 
presented a new challenge for civil authorities in terms of coordination and housing on a large scale. This 
will continue to present a challenge in years to come, as will other challenges arising from the socioeconomic 
changes occurring in Montréal.
The rehabilitation of Montréal’s aging infrastructures constitutes another major issue. Ensuring 
the proper function of the city’s infrastructures on a daily basis is essential to the quality of life and safety 
of its citizens – but it’s also key to Montréal’s economic development. The municipal administration and its 
provincial and federal government partners have earmarked major investments in the next 10 years for much-
needed work on the municipal water and transportation infrastructures. These work projects cause multiple 
inconveniences, particularly for road transportation on the Island of Montréal. They are not without risk and 
may be the source of significant disruptions for Montrealers. The boil water advisory in May 2013 is a good 
example. The preventive notice issued by the city applied to 1.3 million Montrealers over a period of 36 hours. 
It was provoked by work operations meant to bring the Atwater plant up to standard. To this day, this drinking 
water treatment plant, built in 1918, remains the largest plant in Montréal. The challenge of maintaining the 
delivery of services to the population during work on essential but aging infrastructures thus constitutes a 
major concern for Montréal, and that will continue to be the case for years to come.

17  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

BACKGROUND

2.1 ABOUT THE PROGRAM

The 100 Resilient Cities (100RC) program, an initiative of the Rockefeller Foundation, was created to 
help cities across the world deal with growing social, economic and environmental challenges in the 
21st century. The 100RC program supports the adoption and integration of a common definition of urban 
resilience that includes not only shocks, but also stresses that erode the fabric of a city on a daily basis or 
in a cyclical fashion. By responding, at once, to shocks and stresses, a city thus develops its potential for 
collective and individual resilience, thus becoming better equipped to ensure the safety and well-being 
of its entire population.

2.2 MONTRÉAL AND THE PROGRAM

In December 2014, Montréal joined the international network of resilient cities. Through this program, 
the city receives technical assistance and financial resources for a period of two years in order to develop 
and implement its Urban Resilience Strategy, including the hiring of a director of resilience (called Chief 
Resilience Officer, or CRO). In January 2016, Ms. Louise Bradette was appointed Chief Resilience Officer 
in Montréal, with a mandate to further develop the city’s resilience efforts. 

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  18      

2.3 TIES WITH OTHER CITIES IN THE NETWORK

Team Canada Committee (Calgary, Montréal, Toronto and Vancouver): 
Montréal became the first Canadian city to join the 100RC network, with Toronto, Calgary and Vancouver 
joining the following year. Spontaneously, a working group on best practices, called Team Canada, was 
established. It is made up of members of resilience teams from the network’s four Canadian cities. At 
the urging of the École nationale d’administration publique, Montréal played host to a workshop on the 
governance of resilience in October 2017. Other collaborations between the four Canadian cities have 
since been initiated in public health, immigration, social resilience, and adaptation to climate change.

Athens-based meeting on cities and the global migration crisis: 
Montréal was represented at the meetings on the global migration crisis held in Athens from September 
7 to 9, 2016. These meetings fostered an ongoing discussion about challenges specific to cities, but more 
importantly on the solutions that must be put in place. The director of the Bureau de la résilience held 
discussions with representatives from Paris, Los Angeles, Medellìn, Amman, Ramallah and Thessaloniki, 
specifically concerning the challenges of integrating immigrants. She also presented Montréal-based 
initiatives in this area, notably those put forward by the Bureau d’intégration des nouveaux arrivants 
à Montréal. A post-meeting report was produced.

Post-industrial cities committee: 
One of the objectives of the resilience strategy adopted by the city of Glasgow, Scotland, was to establish 
a committee of post-industrial cities in the 100RC network for purposes of sharing and promoting best 
practices. Montréal has a seat on that committee, and its involvement makes it possible to stay apprized 
of emerging trends, notably in regards to the circular economy.

Urban Resilience Summit 2017: 
More than 500 participants from the urban resilience field, including 80 CROs from the 100RC network, 
gathered in New York from July 25 to 28, 2017. This summit organized by 100RC allows cities in the 
network to discuss best practices and common challenges.  

Informal meetings: 
During the preparation of its strategy, the municipal administration drew on discussions with 
representatives from other cities in the 100RC network, notably Rotterdam (the Netherlands), Porto Alegre 
(Brazil), Santiago (Chile), Buenos Aires (Argentina) and Paris (France). These discussions covered similar 
challenges faced by cities.

19  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

2.4 MONTRÉAL’S URBAN RESILIENCE APPROACH  

•  December 2014 

Montréal joins the 100RC network

PHASE 1 

The objective, in this phase, was to deepen our understanding of resilience and 
the challenges specific to Montréal. At the conclusion of this process, a preliminary 
assessment of Montréal’s resilience was produced, and research areas were 
identified for Phase 2.

•  January 2016  

Launch of Phase 1 work and appointment of the director of resilience (CRO)

  “Resilience Program” workshop at Bonsecours Market in Montréal: This 

workshop constituted the first stage in the development of Montréal’s Resilient 
City Strategy. More than 100 partners from a range of sectors gathered for a 
presentation on the 100RC initiative, the concept of resilience, and resilience 
challenges specific to Montréal.

  The workshop saw Montréal’s mayor officially appoint Ms. Louise Bradette 

director of resilience for Montréal.

•  May 2016 

Creation of the Bureau de la résilience

  The Bureau was officially created, with a staff of three full-time employees 

working on the development of the strategy. Communications tools were put 
in place, including a Facebook page (www.facebook.com/ResilientMontreal) 
and a Web site (resilient.montreal.ca).

•  June 2016 

Creation of a steering committee and four working committees to guide the 
development of Montréal’s Resilient City Strategy..

•  Summer 2016 

Workshop, perception survey, and data analyses 

  Several workshops were presented to survey perceptions among some 100 
partners on elements of resilience in Montréal. Each partner produced an 
assessment of the different drivers and sub-drivers of resilience. They were also 
invited to identify priority areas of action to make Montréal more resilient.  
The same survey was widely distributed among the public, with more than 
1,600 citizens responding.

•  February 2017 

Preliminary Resilience Assessment 

  The document entitled Preliminary Resilience Assessment was published in 
February 2017. It presents the work achieved in Phase 1, together with the 
research areas established for Phase 2.

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  20      

PHASE 2

In Phase 2, the focus was brought to bear on a combination of technical 
assessments to go along with stakeholder engagement efforts aimed at 
developing the strategy and its action plan. During this phase, the municipal 
administration deepened its analysis based on the research areas established 
during Phase 1. This resulted in specific priorities and initiatives being set out to 
implement the strategy. The strategy describes the main resilience challenges and 
the opportunities the city intends to take advantage of, as well as the activities 
that the city and its partners will implement to strengthen resilience.

•  March – June  2017 

Diagnosis and research areas

  Several meetings were held with staff in various city departments and external 

organizations in order to further develop the areas of research identified in 
Phase 1. These meetings led to the establishment of four resilience orientations 
and 12 objectives of the Resilience City Strategy. 

•  June 2017 – June 2018 

Development, drafting and validation of the strategy and the action plan

  A series of meetings and workshops were held to identify opportunities to 

establish resilience actions in Montréal.  

•  June 2018 

Launch of Montréal’s Resilient City Strategy and the related action plan.

21  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

MONTRÉAL’S 
RESILIENT 
CITY STRATEGY

STRATÉGIE MONTRÉALAISE POUR UNE VILLE RÉSILIENTE  I  JUIN 2018  I  22      

3.1 VISION FOR MONTRÉAL 

AN ALERT, PROACTIVE 
AND INCLUSIVE 
COMMUNITY 
ACTING ON SOCIAL, 
ECONOMIC AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
CHALLENGES

3.2 MISSION OF THE BUREAU DE LA RÉSILIENCE  

The mission of the Bureau de la résilience complements that of the departments, 
offices and directorates in place at the city. The Bureau answers to the Direction 
générale adjointe à la qualité de vie, and its members work alongside civil security 
and business continuity teams, which are connected to the Direction de la sécurité 
civile et de la résilience. This positioning allows the Bureau de la résilience to gain 
a comprehensive vision of the city and its challenges.

In order to fulfill its vision of an alert, proactive and inclusive community, the 
Bureau de la résilience is committed to doing more than respond in emergency 
situations by taking the following steps:

•  Improve anticipation of emerging risks across the city by integrating stresses  
  and shocks into its analyses;

•  Create sustainable and productive ties with a large contingent of Montréal 
  organizations, specifically in relation to risk prevention;

•  Serve as a vector of change within the municipal administration and in  
  Québec’s public safety community;

•  Mobilize actors absent from conventional networks.  

In order to achieve these steps, the Bureau de la résilience has a mission to:

•  Develop and disseminate Montréal’s Resilient City Strategy;

•  Give the city an overall diagnosis in relation to resilience now and in the 
 

future, and identify the associated vulnerabilities;

•  Prepare and update a coherent and coordinated joint action plan;

•  Pilot specific projects assigned to the Bureau, and support other projects 
  with a direct impact on the development of resilience capacity among 
  Montrealers;

•  Follow up on outcomes of the action plan in order to assess its effectiveness;

•  Advise the municipal administration on integrating the notion of urban  
 

resilience into its policies, plans and strategies;

•  Promote the sharing of best practices with internal and external partners  
 

involved in the strategy.

While Montréal’s Resilient City Strategy, by definition, is comprehensive and 
integrated, its implementation cannot be the work of a limited number of  
people. Its objectives will only be achieved through a series of activities carried 
out by the municipal administration in concert with external organizations and 
Montrealers alike.

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  24      

3.3 ORIENTATIONS AND OBJECTIVES  
 

FOR A RESILIENT CITY 

The municipal administration has identified four major orientations to articulate 
Montréal’s Resilient City Strategy. These orientations stem from work and 
meetings carried out during phases 1 and 2 of the project:
1  TAKE ACTION IN SUPPORT OF A UNIFIED  

AND SAFE COMMUNITY

2  TAKE ACTION TO PROTECT OUR LIVING ENVIRONMENT
3  TAKE ACTION TO MAINTAIN A DIVERSIFIED AND 

INNOVATIVE ECONOMY

4  TAKE ACTION TO PROMOTE INTEGRATED 

GOVERNANCE IN THE SERVICE OF THE COMMUNITY

The first three orientations target broad issue categories likely to affect a city, 
while the final orientation takes aim at governance issues in order to ensure 
appropriate and effective action, particularly in emergency situations.

These four orientations are supported by 12 objectives targeting challenges 
specific to Montréal. They represent elements of resilience in need of 
improvement. The Bureau de la résilience thus hopes to better meet these 
challenges in the years to come, and its strategy includes a concrete action plan.

In the following pages, the four major orientations are defined, and the objectives 
and actions intended to make Montréal resilient are explained. 

 

25  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

I

1
 
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

TAKING ACTION TO SUPPORT A UNITED  
AND SAFE COMMUNITY 

Our city has long been recognized for its tradition of mutual aid. The social 
economy sector – which is already well established in Montréal and supported 
by various government programs – offers a broad array of services adapted 
to the specific needs of the most disadvantaged. Montréal’s rich community 
network, strongly rooted in its neighbourhoods, has spurred the development 
of a considerable capacity to adapt to and thus meet citizens’’ emerging and 
changing needs. What’s more, neighbourhood roundtables have a mandate 
to bring together local actors (community, institutional, political, private, and 
citizens) and offer them a broadly representative local advisory body. Together, 
these actors draw up an overview of neighbourhoods, determining key action 
priorities related to housing, urban development, food and urban security, the 
environment, transportation, and so on. These neighbourhood roundtables place 
citizens at the heart of their approach and mobilize neighbourhoods to work on 
the development of united and safe communities.

This sense of solidarity must be cultivated on a daily basis and enriched to ensure 
the safety of all Montrealers, particularly the most vulnerable. In a context where 
Montréal faces a range of social and environmental challenges, there is significant 
risk of crises situations occurring. Montréal’s population presents shortcomings in 
regards to the individual state of preparedness for disaster. Heightening public 
awareness of the risks that present a threat and the means to prepare and react 
accordingly must be a priority, therefore, and the same can be said for establishing 
mechanisms to promote solidarity and inclusion.

In emergency situations, as in risk prevention, knowledge of best practices and 
social solidarity become powerful drivers of resilience for a community. These 
capacities among Montrealers must be supported and further developed on a 
daily basis in order to highlight the proactive role they can play in risk prevention 
and in emergency situations.

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  26      

 

I

A
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

1
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

OBJECTIVE A 
Strengthen the community’s capacity to adapt and react to natural 
and anthropogenic risks

ACTIONS

1  Promote awareness and social engagement among 

young Montrealers in connection with climate 
change and urban resilience

In the summer of 2017, the Bureau de la résilience 
participated in the pilot phase of Mission Atmosphere, a 
leadership program on climate change offered to young 
Montrealers aged 14 to 17. Organized by Environment 
and Climate Change Canada (ECCC) and the Groupe 
uni des éducateurs-naturalistes et professionnels en 
environnement (GUEPE), Mission Atmosphere has a 
mandate to raise awareness of climate change among 
youth and pique their curiosity about atmospheric 
sciences and urban resilience. Two initial cohorts of young 
francophones and anglophones were trained at the 
Biosphère in the summer of 2017.

In 2018, organizers hope to improve the Mission 
Atmosphere program and broaden its scope of youth 
leadership and civic involvement. To help ECCC and GUEPE 
improve this project, the Bureau de la résilience has 
proposed a broader collaboration. An initial meeting with 
partners interested in this action will serve to:

•  Present the results of the pilot project, the objectives 

of the program and its desired scope;

•  Establish needs and available resources;

•  Set out an action plan.

Principal partners: Environment and Climate Change 
Canada (ECCC), Groupe uni des éducateurs-naturalistes 
et professionnels en environnement (GUEPE), Ville de 
Montréal (Bureau de la résilience, Service de la diversité 
sociale et des sports, Service de l’environnement), and 
other partners to be determined.

Time horizon: medium term

The community is the first to be affected by the 
impacts of natural and anthropogenic catastrophes: 
lost property, income and time; compromised quality 
of life, health and even lives in some cases. Yet, on a 
day-to-day basis, the population is relatively unaware 
of these risks. The findings of the Baromètre CIRANO 
2017 survey on risk perception are revealing in this 
regard. Only 13% of the Quebecers surveyed viewed 
floods, earthquakes and forest fires as a personal 
risk, and less than a third deemed terrorism to be a 
significant or highly significant risk.

Greater shared awareness is necessary, since, 
according to the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC), natural catastrophes will 
be increasingly frequent, diversified and intense 
in decades to come. Montrealers are only just now 
beginning to understand natural catastrophes 
and their social, economic and environmental 
impacts. However, among the population, little 
is known, still, about the multiple emerging risks 
and their probabilities and impacts. These include 
epidemiological and seismic risks, or risks related 
to cyberterrorism. It is important, nay essential, to 
further heighten this awareness, without being 
alarmist. The state of preparedness and knowledge 
of probable risks attest to this. Simple gestures, such 
as knowing what to do, who to call, what to prepare, 
where to go (if applicable) and above all, the ability 
to assume individual responsibility so as not to hinder 
emergency services in the crucial early hours of a 
disaster can make all the difference.

In addition to being able to react appropriately in 
an emergency situation, the community must also 
be capable of vigilance and must know what actions 
to take to protect fellow citizens. The simple fact of 
knowing the warning signs of potentially dangerous 
situations (extreme weather event, radicalization, 
package left without surveillance) or the proper alert 
procedure constitutes an attitude geared to action.

27  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

 

I

A
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

1
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

2  Develop emergency preparedness and community 

3  Support organizations that promote citizen 

resilience workshops

engagement and volunteer training

The Coopérative de Solidarité Transition NDG was 
founded in 2014 with the aim of fostering collective 
resilience in the neighbourhood of Notre-Dame-de-
Grâce. In 2017, a new project was put forward, involving 
a series of presentations and public training sessions. 
The objective was to heighten awareness and encourage 
citizens to create a 72-hour emergency kit and carry out 
awareness exercises, but also to promote the development 
of community-based networks, for example through 
efforts to know your neighbours and the neighbourhood 
resources that are available. This pilot project promoting 
a state of preparedness among citizens, a knowledge of 
risks, and social cohesion will be supported by several 
city departments, and it could be duplicated in other 
Montréal sectors.

Major project implementation steps:

•  Participate in the development of the training program 
on the following themes: preparation of an emergency 
kit; ensuring your water supply; emergency recipes 
and foods; emergency housing; first aid and health; 
hygiene; communication; heating and energy; social 
and psychological resilience;

•  Present the state of preparedness of the city and the 
borough to citizens as part of the training program;

•  Assess the success and scope of the training sessions 
using a questionnaire with performance indicators, 
distributed to participants at the end of the sessions;

•  Duplicate the project in other boroughs, based on 

specific interests and needs.

Principal partners:  Transition NDG, Ville de Montréal 
(Bureau de la résilience, Centre de sécurité civile), Côte-
des-Neiges–Notre-Dame-de-Grâce borough.

Time horizon: medium term

 

In order to develop competencies among citizens intent 
on volunteering in the event of a disaster and to empower 
them to play an important role, the Centre de sécurité 
civile, in collaboration with key actors at the community 
level, will support awareness activities in conjunction with 
Civil Protection Week, which runs in May of every year, 
as well as promote organizations offering emergency 
preparedness training on a year-round basis. With training 
and support from organizations, these citizens, where 
required, will be able to support the city’s response in the 
event of disaster.

 

In order to meet this objective, Montréal is committed to:

•  Supporting volunteer organizations and associations 
that offer emergency measures training and support;

•  Participate in and develop activities for citizens with the 

aim of promoting risk awareness;

•  On the city’s Web site, promote organizations that offer 

training sessions and emergency measures support.

  The creation of a training session on actions that save lives 

is an example of a project the Bureau de la résilience will 
support in the years ahead. Under this project put forward 
by Montréal’s health and social services network, a 
public training session on proper responses to emergency 
situations will be offered. The training session will be 
geared to youth and adults alike. 
 
Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Centre de sécurité 
civile, Bureau de la résilience), Montréal’s health and 
social services network, volunteer organizations, and 
associations to be determined.

  Time horizon: medium term

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  28      

 

A
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

1
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

  Montréal in action: Centre for the Prevention 

  Inspiration: 

of Radicalization Leading to Violence

New York’s CERT program

  New York’s CERT (community emergency response teams 
or NYC CERT) teams are made up of dedicated volunteers 
who help prepare their neighbours and communities for 
various types of catastrophes. NYC CERT volunteers are 
trained to support efforts by New York’s first responders. 
Outside of emergency situations, CERT New York teams 
educate communities about emergency preparedness, 
working in connection with the Ready New York 
program and building community emergency response 
networks via the NYC Citizen Corps program.

  Training sessions on life-saving actions 

by the French Red Cross

  The French Red Cross’s Summer caravan fans out across 

the streets of France offering free introductions to 
first response actions, in a warm and family-friendly 
atmosphere. Three training session are offered to the 
public; Alerter-Masser-Défibriller, Initiation à la réduction 
des risques, and Initiation aux premiers secours et 
comportements qui sauvent. Since the Caravan was first 
created in the summer of 1999, close to 47,000 people 
have been introduced to life-saving actions.

  The Centre for the Prevention of Radicalization Leading to 

Violence (CPRLV) is a pioneering initiative put forward by 
the city and the first of its kind in North America. It is the 
first independent non-profit organization whose objective 
is to prevent the phenomenon of radicalization leading 
to violence, and support people affected by this reality: 
individuals who’ve been radicalized or are in danger of 
being radicalized, their loved ones, teachers, professionals, 
responders, and community outreach workers. The CPRLV 
also works to prevent hate crimes and incidents and 
support victims of such acts by ensuring that they  
receive care.

  In order to meet some of these objectives, the CPRLV 

launched the following initiatives:  

•  The “What if I Was Wrong? When we talk we learn!” 

campaign geared to youth and adults. Its objective is to 
promote aptitudes that favour the process of resilience 
and the development of critical thinking as protection 
factors against radical and extremist discourses leading 
to violence.  

•  The Mon histoire project traces the process of identity 

formation and the impact of violent radicalization. This 
project is meant to serve as an educational support tool 
for purposes of prevention. It is based on testimonials 
from youth and siblings directly affected by violent 
radicalization. It is also intended to allow professionals 
working with youth (teachers, educators, community 
outreach workers, social workers, etc.) and their loved 
ones (families, siblings, peers) to become reflexive 
actors, break their silence, and reassume a mobilization 
role, both educational and social, within our society.

29  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

 

I

B
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

1
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

ACTIONS

4  Consolidate the housing stock and emergency 

services for vulnerable clienteles 

  The agglomeration of Montréal has temporary housing 

resources in place for populations in the event of a 
major disaster or disruptive event across its territory. 
However, better knowledge of existing resources and 
information-sharing would facilitate emergency first 
response measures.

 

In order to meet these challenges while ensuring the 
viability of these resources, the Centre de sécurité civile 
intends to:

•  Annually update data on emergency shelters in 

boroughs and reconstituted cities;

•  Assess the energy independence of emergency shelters 

and centres in the agglomeration of Montréal;

•  Identify large-scale emergency housing solutions  

across the city.

  The concerned city departments, in advance of crises, 

favour improved coordination and communication 
between government and community-based authorities. 
Integrated planning and a review of protocols will make 
it possible to anticipate situations where minor impacts 
have the potential to become major impacts.

  Principal partners:  Ville de Montréal (Centre de  
sécurité civile, Bureau de la résilience, Service de la 
diversité sociale et des sports/Protecteur des personnes 
en situation d’itinérance), Sun Youth, the Red Cross, the 
Office municipal d’habitation de Montréal (OMHM), 
and the Société d’habitation et de développement de 
Montréal (SHDM).

  Time horizon: medium term

OBJECTIVE B 
Preserve an environment  
that meets Montrealers’ essential needs

A resilient community’s assets include the autonomy 
of its people, the resources at their disposal, and their 
capacity to improve their living conditions. Montréal 
belongs to a society that, on balance, meets the basic 
needs of its citizens. That said, poverty is a reality 
in the city, as 17.9% of the population within the 
agglomeration of Montréal live below the low income 
cut-off, according to data from the 2016 Statistics 
Canada survey. Many Montrealers don’t have access 
to proper housing in terms of size and condition, 
have difficulty obtaining fresh and nutritious foods, 
live in isolation, or experience difficulties related to 
social and cultural integration. These situations, if left 
unchecked or unmitigated, can lead to true crises or 
exacerbate the impacts of a disaster.

New initiatives make it possible to better understand 
and target Montrealers’ basic needs. In June 2017, 
the municipal administration launched its first Social 
Development Policy. In December of the same year, 
Montréal became the first French-language city 
to form a food policy council. In March 2018, the 
“Réflexe-Montréal” framework agreement was 
concluded between the Government of Québec and 
the Ville de Montréal. This agreement, which concerns 
the transfer to the city of powers and budgets related 
to housing development across Montréal, represents 
a major lever for retaining families and improving 
the quality of life of Montrealers. In addition, the 
municipal administration recently announced its 
2018-2020 Action Plan on Homelessness. The plan 
favours a comprehensive approach to meeting the 
needs of people living with homelessness or at risk 
of becoming homeless, notably as they pertain to 
housing through the plan to create 950 social and 
community housing units.

These types of initiatives and agreements support 
resilience capacity among individuals and, by 
extension, among Montréal’s communities. Other 
initiatives address the basic needs of Montrealers, 
particularly those related to the prevention of 
emergency situations, and these efforts further 
support initiatives and ensure consistent action by  
the city.

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  30      

 

I

B
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

1
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

5  Expand the Quartier intégré (QI) project

6  Promote the resilience of the food system on  

  The municipal administration made commitment 

to chart a course for sustainable development 
more than 10 years ago, in collaboration with the 
broader Montréal community. In order to ensure that 
departments coordinate their actions in this regard, the 
city implemented the Quartier intégré project in three 
Montréal sectors, notably Hochelaga, Sainte-Marie and 
Montréal-Nord. This project calls for actions in these 
target neighbourhoods identified as vulnerable on three 
levels: economic, social and environmental.

  Following the assessment of the Quartier intégré project 

(currently in progress), other Montréal sectors could be 
targeted by the Bureau du développement durable. In this 
context, le Bureau de la résilience will collaborate with the 
Bureau du développement durable in an effort to include 
notions of community resilience when selecting the next 
target neighbourhoods, notably by using:  

•  Cartographic results of the socioeconomic vulnerability 

index;

•  The assessment of Montrealers’ social capital.

  Teams from both Bureaus will meet to:

•  Ensure the relevance of shared data in connection with 

the program objectives;

•  Share knowledge and best practices in order to 

promote the sustainable and resilient development of 
Montréal’s neighbourhoods;

•  Identify new avenues of joint intervention in the  

longer term.

  Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Bureau du 

développement durable, Bureau de la résilience).

  Time horizon: medium term

 

the island of Montréal
In 2018, the city’s Service du développement économique 
(SDÉ) and the Ministère de l’Agriculture, des pêcheries 
et de l’Alimentation du Québec (MAPAQ) will conduct 
a study on the economic potential of commercial urban 
agriculture across the island of Montréal. This study 
will result in the establishment of a commercial urban 
agriculture support strategy and the implementation of 
an action plan specific to the agglomeration of Montréal.

  These initiatives will make it possible to:

•  Validate related opportunities in this field and its 

interaction with the social economy sector;

•  Support the city’s decision-making as it relates to food 

system resilience.

 

In order to encourage these initiatives, the Bureau de la 
résilience intends to: 

•  Sit on the city’s internal committee on urban 

agriculture, which will support the work of the SDÉ 
and MAPAQ;

•  Widely share the findings of the study on the 

assessment of commercial urban agriculture’s potential 
in Montréal with its current and future partners;

•  Foster collaborations in connection with food supply 

resilience in the event of a situation involving a 
disruption.

  Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Service du 

développement économique, Service de la diversité 
sociale et des sports, Bureau de la résilience), Ministère 
de l’Agriculture, des pêcheries et de l’Alimentation du 
Québec, Conseil de politiques alimentaires de Montréal, 
and other partners to be confirmed.

  Time horizon: long term

  Montréal in action: A joint response to the needs  

This plan is meant to:

 

of asylum seekers

  In the past two years, Montréal has seen new needs 
emerge in connection with the reception of asylum 
seekers. This trend is expected to continue in the years 
to come as a result of international and climate-related 
issues. The United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees estimates that 25 million to 1 billion people will 
be displaced due to climate change by 2050. 

  The Bureau d’intégration des nouveaux arrivants de 
Montréal (BINAM) has a mandate to coordinate the 
municipal administration’s efforts in this regard. A special 
response plan for asylum seekers was produced in the 
fall of 2017 and is pending approval. Its aim is to better 
support actions by various Montréal stakeholders, in 
collaboration with the concerned provincial and federal 
authoripties. 

•  Anticipate an exceptional migration event and 

organize a mobilization;

•  Mobilize and coordinate the city’s internal resources 
and maintain ties with government and community-
based resources.  

  In response to the increased influx of asylum seekers, the 
municipal administration, through BINAM, is working to 
ensure coordinated and cohesive action in connection 
with the reception and integration of immigrants 
across the city. In accordance with the principles of a 
sanctuary city, municipal authorities are ensuring that 
the necessary actions are taken to facilitate the reception 
and integration of asylum seekers by optimizing their 
effectiveness. 

31  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

 

I

C
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

1
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

OBJECTIVE C 
Develop mutual aid and inclusion mechanisms to promote solidarity 
between citizens and reduce vulnerabilities

Solidarity and civic-mindedness between citizens 
are powerful mechanisms of resilience. Seniors 
and people with disabilities living in isolation, new 
immigrants and First Nations people without social 
networks, overwhelmed young families, and the 
homeless – all stand to benefit from regular and 
positive contact with people in their environment.

The World Health Organization (WHO) deems social 
support to be a major determining factor in individual 
physical and mental health. By promoting civic 
participation at the local level, or simply by fostering 
good neighbourly ties to break isolation, the city 
can make a vital contribution to quality of life in 
urban communities and to the vitality and safety of 
neighbourhoods.

Studies conducted in some American and Asian cities 
have demonstrated that a strong culture of mutual 
aid can favour the adoption of appropriate reflexes 
in emergency situations – for example a major 
summer heat wave or a situation calling for the mass 
evacuation of a territory – as well as a more efficient 
return to normalcy. Social ties can thus play an 
essential role in resilience capacity among individuals 
and communities.

Numerous organizations and institutions collaborate 
with the city and with the provincial and federal 
governments in an effort to maintain equitable 
access to quality social infrastructures (schools, 
libraries, sports facilities, etc.) and social environments 
(parks, green alleys, community gardens, etc.). 
Municipal initiatives have also been launched to 
fight prejudice towards certain groups of individuals, 
ensure universal access to services, and promote the 
development of a broader Montréal community that 
is safe, fair and sustainable.

ACTIONS 

7  Foster the development of social capital among 
Montrealers in order to strengthen community 
resilience 

  Human relations constitute an essential component in 

the quality of life of citizens. Often referred to as social 
capital, these relations are based on trust between 
individuals, the strength of solidarity networks in a 
society, and the willingness of citizens to practice mutual 
aid and cooperation.

 

In order to support social cohesion and resilience in 
Montréal communities, the Bureau de la résilience will 
develop social capital indicators adapted to the Montréal 
context and integrate them into quality of life index 
currently under development at the city. These indicators 
will:

•  Measure social capital in Montréal neighbourhoods 

more closely using data from Statistics Canada’s 2016 
Census of Population Program

•  Improve the reflection process underway at the Service 
de la diversité sociale et des sports in relation to quality 
of life and urban safety;

•  Support local initiatives and share initiatives developed 

by other cities in the 100RC network.

 

In addition, a special initiative will be carried out in 
collaboration with the city’s Protecteur des personnes en 
situation d’itinérance, as part of an effort to establish 
contact with Montrealers who are most difficult to reach.

  Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Bureau de la 
résilience, Service de la diversité sociale et des sports, 
Service du développement économique/Montréal en 
statistiques), and other partners to be determined.

  Time horizon: medium term

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  32      

 

I

C
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

1
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

8 Understand and support the process of resilience 
and the integration of immigrants into Montréal 
life

  Created in February 2016, the Bureau d’intégration des 
nouveaux arrivants de Montréal (BINAM) puts forward 
actions meant to accelerate the social and economic 
integration of new immigrants and thus facilitate their 
positive contributions to Montréal society.  

 

In collaboration with BINAM, the Bureau de la résilience 
is taking part in the Building Migrant Resilience in Cities 
(BMRC) research project undertaken by researchers from 
Québec and Ontario. BMRC’s objective is to document, 
analyze and compare resilience capacity among 
immigrants as well as the challenges they face in various 
Canadian cities.

  The BMRC has already allowed the Montréal network to 
identify promising research projects. In the medium term, 
this network aims to:

•  Finance exhaustive and comparative studies;

•  Build bridges between public, community and academic 

initiatives in Québec and Ontario;

•  Support decision-making processes within cities in the 

network, specifically in this area, by integrating an 
improved understanding of resilience among immigrant 
communities.

  Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Bureau 

d’intégration des nouveaux arrivants de Montréal, Bureau 
de la résilience) Montréal’s Building Migrant Resilience 
in Cities network (Concordia University, Université du 
Québec à Montréal, Table de concertation des organismes 
aux services des personnes réfugiées et immigrantes, 
Centraide, and others).

9  Compile a list of persons in vulnerable situations 

and develop means of communication

  The Centre de sécurité civile, the Bureau de la résilience 
and its partners plan to establish a strategy for reaching 
people in vulnerable situations so as to transmit specific 
messages and provide adapted support in the event of a 
major disaster.

  A list of people in vulnerable situations based on specific 

criteria already exists in the health care network. In 
order to specify prevention initiatives and actions with 
vulnerable clienteles not targeted by the health care 
network, the city, through its municipal departments, 
wishes to establish a mechanism to:

•  Develop relevant indicators of criteria for vulnerability, 

based on probable disasters, making it possible to 
target specific populations;

•  Adapt messages and means of dissemination with 

external organizations offering services adapted to 
vulnerable clients and holding client databases, in order 
to effectively communicate with those clients in the 
event of a major disaster;

•  Identify geographical sectors where populations in 

vulnerable situations are concentrated, based on the 
type of disaster;

•  Develop emergency response and communication 

protocols for these populations.

  Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Service de sécurité 
incendie de Montréal, Centre de sécurité civile, Bureau de 
la résilience), Direction de la santé publique, CIUSSS du 
Centre-Sud-de-l’Île-de-Montréal, Urgences-santé, Société 
de transport de Montréal, and other community partners 
to be determined.

  Time horizon: medium term

  Time horizon: medium term

  Montréal in action: A Montréal-specific approach  

to urban safety

  A strong sense of safety prevails on the streets of 

Montréal and in the city’s neighbourhoods. However, 
some urban safety problems persist, particularly among 
youth. The phenomenon of street gangs is not new to 
Montréal, but it remains a concern, notably due to intra-
gang violence and the recruitment and sexual exploitation 
of young girls. New problems specific to youth have also 
emerged in Montréal and beyond

•  Cyberbullying and cybercrime

•  Youth radicalization leading to violence

  In order to better meet these urban safety challenges 

affecting Montréal’s youth, a new project was put forward 

by the Service de la diversité sociale et des sports and 
members of the Réseau d’échange et de soutien aux  
actions locales (RÉSAL), with support from the Ministère  
de la Sécurité publique du Québec.

  The RÉSAL project is intended to:

•  Support Montréal communities taking preventive  

action aimed at curbing youth violence;

•  Improve communication between community outreach 

workers and Montréal police officers in order to  
foster a good knowledge of the current problems and 
identify new actions;

•  Offer training on specific issues related to youth 

violence (street gangs, sexual exploitation, bullying  
and radicalization).

33  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

I

 

2 TAKE ACTION TO PROTECT  
OUR LIVING ENVIRONMENT
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

The quality of life of Montrealers depends largely on the quality of their day-to-
day living environment. This environment is made up of various infrastructures 
that help maintain good living conditions across the city: on the one hand, green 
infrastructures favour biodiversity, ecological practices and urban agriculture, thus 
promoting the health and well-being of the population; while grey infrastructures, 
including buildings, water supply and sewer networks, and artworks, support 
essential public services. These assets form a shared heritage that’s key to the life 
of the population, Montréal’s economic vitality, and our capacity to deal with 
recurring or exceptional disturbances. 

Recurring disturbances include the Montréal climate. Marked by harsh winters 
and significant seasonal temperature variations, our climate, each year, 
affects both the population of Montréal and its infrastructures. What’s more, 
climate change is likely to exacerbate natural phenomena, such as heavy rains, 
heat waves, violent storms, drought, spring flooding, and higher average 
temperatures. In order to sustain resilience in our living environments, green 
and grey infrastructures must be protected and made more resistant, not only to 
ongoing stresses (pollution, freeze-thaw cycles, etc.), but also to the natural and 
anthropogenic hazards likely to affect them. 

Land use as well as green and grey infrastructure planning must support our 
collective development, therefore, and take into account risks and their potential 
environmental and social impacts.

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  34      

 

I

A
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

2
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

OBJECTIVE A 
Ensure improved consideration of risks in land use  
and infrastructure planning 

ACTIONS 

10 Establish methods, standards and regulations 

pertaining to resilient construction and the 
integration of green infrastructures  

 

The spring floods of 2017 highlighted the need for 
joint action by municipal departments when it comes 
to resilient city-wide planning. In order to meet this 
challenge and better integrate the notion of urban 
resilience into construction methods, standards and 
regulations at the city, the Centre de sécurité civile and 
the Bureau de la résilience will establish a committee to 
initiate a planning process, in collaboration with several 
departments and external partners.

 

This committee will have a mandate to:

•  Study global methods of planning, adaptation 

and mitigation vis-à-vis natural hazards and, most 
importantly, floods;

•  Develop a planning model applied specifically to 

Montréal’s reality;

•  Issue a report with recommendations on adaptation 

and mitigation measures to put in place.

 

Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Bureau 
de la résilience, Centre de sécurité civile, Service 
de la mise en valeur du territoire, Service des 
infrastructures, de la voirie et des transports, Service du 
développement économique, Service de l’eau, Service 
de l’environnement), Kheops consortium, and other 
partners to be determined.

 

Tine horizon: medium term

Ongoing climate changes have a definite impact on 
the city, spurring efforts to identify means to ensure 
that urban planning is designed to mitigate the 
effects of climate change on our daily life and limit 
the consequences of extreme weather events. At the 
same time, vulnerabilities intrinsic to the city – like 
Montréal’s location in a seismic zone or the location 
of some neighbourhoods in flood-prone areas – must 
inform responsible infrastructure planning based  
on risks.

Urban planning solutions constitute an important 
resilience factor, as they can help reduce certain 
chronic stresses. The Guidelines for New Development 
in Proximity to Railway Operations, a document 
published in 2003 and updated in 2013 by the 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities and the 
Railway Association of Canada, is a good example. 
These guidelines are aimed at preventing and 
resolving differences that may arise when people  
live or work in proximity to railway installations, as 
is the case in Montréal. Urban planning can also play 
a role in mitigating the consequences or facilitating 
disaster response by improving access to emergency 
services, for example, or facilitating the evacuation  
of populations.

The risk profile across the city, specifically as it 
pertains to the increased probability of known 
hazards (e.g., frequency of spring flooding) or new 
natural or anthropogenic threats (e.g., storage 
of dangerous goods), must be integrated into 
resilient, sustainable and safe land use planning. 
New development projects can help prevent the 
emergence of added vulnerabilities or ensure that 
populations are not exposed to unacceptable levels  
of risk. As well, more must be done to monitor 
current risks across the city so as to prevent harmful 
impacts. These complex issues come under the 
purview of multiple municipal departments and levels 
of government, and they present a major challenge 
for Montréal.

35  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

 

I

 

B
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O
T
E
A
 
F
I
T
C
E
J
B
O

 

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

2
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

11 Regulate the management of dangerous goods at 

fixed sites across the agglomeration of Montréal

  Amid a context of urban densification, the harmonious 

and safe cohabitation between industries and residential 
neighbourhoods poses an ongoing challenge. Several 
facilities across the city produce, store or use dangerous 
goods.

 

The Centre de sécurité civile was given a mandate to 
develop a regulatory civil security framework for facilities 
at significant risk. The framework will help ensure public 
safety and manage major industrial risks in connection 
with land use management.

  An agglomeration-wide by-law will be aimed at meeting 

the following objectives:  

•  Draw up a portrait of major technological risks across 

the agglomeration of Montréal;

•  Develop the urban planning tools to regulate urban 

development in proximity to facilities at significant risk;

•  Improve the state of preparedness of emergency first 

responders;

•  Promote a safe living environment for Montréal’s 

population.

 

Principal partners: The Direction de l’aménagement 
at the boroughs of Rivière-des-Prairies–Pointe-
aux-Trembles, Saint-Laurent, Sud-Ouest and Ville 
de Montréal-Est, Service de sécurité incendie de 
Montréal, Service de mise en valeur du territoire, 
Service de l’environnement, Service du développement 
économique, Service des affaires juridiques, Centre de 
sécurité civile, Polytechnique Montréal, Association 
industrielle de l’Est de Montréal, Direction de la santé 
publique, and the Major Industrial Accidents Reduction 
Council.

 

Time horizon: medium term

OBJECTIVE B 
Carry out more exhaustive cost-benefit  
analyses on mitigation measures

Ecosystems across Montréal render truly “essential 
ecological services” to the public. Every day, they play 
a part in improving the physical and mental health 
of citizens by helping purify air, providing spaces for 
relaxation and outdoor sports activities, and making 
the urban landscape more attractive.

These ecosystems help regulate temperature 
more effectively by reducing urban heat island 
effects, facilitate stormwater management by 
increasing ground water retention capacity, 
and fight atmospheric pollution. They represent 
potentially effective mitigation measures that will 
protect Montrealers against the impacts of natural 
catastrophes (floods, extreme heat, high winds, etc.). 

In order to assess and establish the most appropriate 
mitigation measures, the municipal administration 
will work with experts to carry out a series of analyses 
of the most prevalent hazards in Montréal. These 
analyses will make it possible to better determine the 
costs of the measures that could be put in place, but 
more importantly to assess their actual potential for 
reducing impacts on populations, the environment 
and infrastructures. These measures will not eliminate 
catastrophes, however, which is why it’s important 
to remain vigilant about the existence of risk, even if 
these developments make them less frequent  
and destructive.

  Montréal in action: Green infrastructures 

on Avenue Papineau

  Closely associated with the development of the new 

Complexe environnemental de Saint-Michel, the 
project to redevelop Avenue Papineau is aimed at 
using an experimental method to optimize stormwater 
management.

 

In 2017, the municipal administration built two 
connected bioretention basins along the eastern side 
of Avenue Papineau over a distance of two kilometers. 
These basins collect stormwater runoff along the road 
and sidewalks.

  With the permanent integration of a green 

infrastructure in the public domain, connected to a key 
transportation project, the municipal administration is:

•  Innovating and thus meeting its sustainable 
development and urban resilience objectives;

•  Helping reduce heat island effects through a massive 

greening project.

 

In addition, starting in 2018, a monitoring program 
will track the development of optimal management 
practices in order to foster new expertise at the city.

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  36      

 

I

B
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

2
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

 

 

 

 

ACTIONS 

12 Analyze the costs-benefits of flooding 

13 Study the costs-benefits of measures 

mitigation measures 

  Due to the complexity of waterways and the uncertainty 
of hydrological forecasts, several traditional prevention 
solutions, such as the construction of dams, have often 
generated unexpected and undesirable impacts. These 
include the ecological fragmentation of waterways and 
wetlands, the transfer of risk to other sectors, or the 
exacerbation of impacts on protected areas in the event 
of a breakdown. This uncertainty is now amplified by 
climate change.

In order to establish prevention solutions that will make 
the agglomeration of Montréal more flood resilient, it 
is essential of improve our knowledge of probabilities 
and vulnerabilities present across the city. This increased 
recognition of risks will allow us to better adapt 
prevention measures in land use development as well as 
establish structural measures and green infrastructures.

From this perspective, the municipal administration must 
do a better job of assessing its vulnerability to floods 
and identifying means to reduce that vulnerability and 
thus improve overall resilience. In order to achieve this, 
the municipal administration will develop an analysis 
intended to:

 

 

to reduce heat island effects   
 
The INSPQ, in collaboration with ECCC, initiated a 
decision support project geared to cities. This tool is used 
to determine which urban planning actions are most 
likely to reduce heat island effects, for example planting 
vegetation, the conversion to white roofs or green roofs. 
This tool will serve to estimate the expected reduction in 
temperature, based on the type of action, and support 
decision-making based on scientific knowledge.

  Major steps in the project: 

•  Carry out land modelling across the city;  

•  Produce models for large Canadian cities, including 

Toronto and Vancouver;

•  Develop a decision support tool geared to 

municipalities.

Principal partners: Institut national de santé publique 
du Québec (INSPQ), Environment and Climate Change 
Canada (ECCC), Ville de Montréal (Bureau de la 
résilience, Centre de sécurité civile)

Time horizon: in progress 

•  Establish vulnerability criteria in a geographically 

limited sector;

•  Quantify the impacts of the 2017 floods, based on 

vulnerability criteria, and thus forecast the potential 
impact of future floods;

•  Identify and classify potential mitigation measures and 
strategies based on the following resilience strategies: 
profitability, social acceptability, sustainability, 
environmental impact, flexibility in regards to climate 
change and a so-called “no regret” measure.

Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Bureau de la 
résilience, Centre de sécurité civile), and other partners 
to be determined.

Time horizon: medium term

 

Inspiration: Rotterdam Water Square in Montréal

  The concept of the water square, developed in 

Rotterdam, denotes the construction of true 
public spaces and/or recreational infrastructures in 
neighbourhoods, capable of accepting stormwater 
runoff by serving as water retention basins. Rather 
than invest if two dedicated infrastructures, therefore, 
the same infrastructure performs dual functions. 

  The Service de l’eau de la Ville de Montréal is currently 

working to build Montréal’s first water square. This pilot 
project could help make the existing sewer network 
more resilient, without a corresponding rise in costs, 
while improving living environment for residents.

  A water square has the capacity to offer recreational, 
sports and educational activities. It also allows various 
actors (developers, consultants, elected officials, citizens, 
etc.) to collaborate in a spirit of innovation in order to 
meet the objective of the city’s Master Plan. By taking 
into consideration the fact that in new neighbourhoods, 
10% of lands must be used for parks, the concept of the 
water square is an opportunity that holds good potential 
for repeatability across the city.

37  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

 

I

C
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

2
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

OBJECTIVE C 
Develop and sustain infrastructures to ensure the maintenance  
of services and essential systems

In order to ensure the proper function of major urban 
systems across the city, the municipal administration 
is not only required to maintain its infrastructures, 
but it must also anticipate emerging risks so as 
to better manage their consequences for the 
population. To adequately support decision-making 
by public and private authorities, it is necessary to 
gain a clearer picture of climate change’s potential 
impact on certain networks, identify the proper 
adaptation measures to implement, and conduct cost-
benefit analyses of these actions. What’s more, the 
integration of new technologies in the development 
and day-to-day management of networks can give 
rise to new vulnerabilities. Examples of recent 
innovations with the potential to optimize network 
performance, but also render networks more 
vulnerable, include the use of massive open-source 
data and smart counters, the implementation of 
remote control systems for infrastructures, and 
the advent of the Internet of Things and artificial 
intelligence.

Municipal infrastructures, like those managed by 
other levels of public administration or private 
enterprises, are a key component of Montréal’s 
economic dynamism and the quality of life that 
the city offers its population. Essential to the 
proper function of the city and its citizens, electric 
power, transportation, telecommunications and 
water systems often function interdependently. 
Many municipal infrastructures across the city are 
aging and have been poorly maintained over the 
years. Others have seen their residual capacity 
progressively reduced with the development of new 
neighbourhoods, thus making them particularly 
vulnerable to hazards. Sudden breakdowns and 
planned work projects alike can have major 
consequences for Montréal, both financial  
and in terms of activities carried out by the city  
and its citizens. 

In October 2016, the related municipal departments 
revealed that 45% of Montréal’s road network – 
more than 1,822 kilometres of road – was in poor 
or very poor condition. What’s more, 22% of the 
sewer network and 13% of the drinking water supply 
system are in need of repair. In order to deal with 
the situation, the municipal administration adopted 
an action plan in 2015 calling for the repair of 5,000 
kilometres of streets and water connections over 
10 years. In April 2017, the governments of Québec 
and Canada added to the investments already made 
under the Montréal Water Strategy by announcing 
that more than $84.4 million would be earmarked 
to improve the water supply system and the sewer 
network in the Montréal region.

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  38      

 

I

C
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

2
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

ACTIONS 

14 Promote the resilience of critical infrastructures 

15 Contribute to the resilient development  

 

 

 

 

across Montréal and their adaptation 
to climate change

In 2015, the municipal administration adopted its first 
Climate Change Adaptation Plan for the Montréal 
Agglomeration in collaboration with municipal 
departments and local administrations. This plan, 
now mid-way through its implementation, is aimed 
at assessing the effects of climate change on the 
agglomeration and establishing the necessary measures 
to minimize its impacts, notably on city infrastructures.

In conjunction with the development of this plan, 
some city departments and a number of private and 
public partners have been working jointly for the past 
few years on making critical infrastructures across the 
city more resilient. In order to formalize and improve 
this collaboration, the Centre de sécurité civile and 
the Bureau de la résilience proposed the creation of 
the Conseil des réseaux d’infrastructures et de services 
essentiels (CRISE). The CRISE would have a mandate to:

•  Review joint operational procedures involving 

municipal civil security authorities and managers of 
emergency measures for critical infrastructures;

•  Develop and track resilience indicators applied to 

infrastructures across Montréal in collaboration with 
the Service de l’environnement;

•  Share best local and national practices in climate 

change adaptation and the cyber-resilience of 
networks, in particular.

In addition, the CRISE will support the work in progress 
and explore potential future collaborations under a new 
agreement between the city’s Service de l’environnement 
and Ouranos, the Consoritum on Regional Climatology 
and Adaptation to Climate Change.  

Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Bureau de 
la résilience, Centre de sécurité civile, Service de 
l’environnement, Service de l’eau) Bell Canada, 
Energir, Hydro-Québec, Ouranos, Réseau de transport 
métropolitain, Société de transport de Montréal, and 
other partners to be determined.

 

 

 

 

Time horizon: medium term

of the smart city  
 
Montréal is proud to be recognized as a hub for digital 
technologies, and the municipal administration strives 
to become a world leader among smart cities. The 
Bureau de la ville intelligente et numérique has been 
instrumental in the growth of digital technologies across 
the city, launching its first action plan in 2015. In order 
to ensure the resilient development of the smart city, risk 
management related to the security of new innovations 
remains a priority for the city’s Service des technologies 
de l’information.

The challenges in this area are manifold. Since 2017, 
the city has put forward a pair of initiatives intended to 
better prepare municipal employees and departments 
to meet these challenges: 

•  Establish an initial campaign to raise awareness of 

cybersecurity risks and best practices for all municipal 
employees;

•  Partnership agreement with the Smart Cybersecurity 

Network (Serene Risc) housed at the Université de 
Montréal to create a research and development hub 
for cybersecurity and IT resilience, business intelligence 
and big data, artificial intelligence, the Internet of 
Things, and telecommunications.

In order to build upon this momentum, the Bureau 
de la résilience and its partners intend to initiate a 
technological pilot project aimed at:

•  Carrying out a proof of concept related to the 

integration of a technological innovation in municipal 
digital infrastructure;

•  Testing and ensuring the protection of data and 

cybersecurity in relation to this innovation;

•  Assessing means through which cyber-resilience can 

be integrated into this innovation from the outset 
(project design phase).

Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Service des 
technologies de l’information, Bureau de la résilience, 
Bureau de la ville intelligente et numérique), Smart 
Cybersecurity Network (Serene Risc)/Université de 
Montréal, and other partners to be determined.

 

Time horizon: medium term

39  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

I

3
 
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

TAKE ACTION TO SUSTAIN A DIVERSIFIED  
AND INNOVATIVE ECONOMY

In spite of the rapid growth of Montréal’s economy in the past few years, 
the municipal administration faces a number of socioeconomic challenges. 
Slower demographic growth, the aging of the city’s population, labour force 
requalification needs arising from massive retirement departures – all constitute 
disruptive elements of our economy with the potential to cause crises. Also 
important to consider is that our economy is undergoing rapid changes, including 
the loss of manufacturing jobs to emerging countries such as China and India. 
To sustain a resilient economy, Montréal will be required to attract foreign talent 
and give new immigrants professional recognition and the living conditions 
required to properly integrate them into the community and retain them over 
the long term.

Montréal will also be required to foster a greater state of preparedness for 
various disturbances among its companies. According to a study by Gartner Inc. 
and the University of Wisconsin cited in the Guide en gestion de la continuité des 
activités du Québec in 2010, 43% of North American companies confronted with 
a major crisis never re-open, while 29% of the remaining companies cease their 
activities within two years. The more generalized adoption of continuity plans for 
Montréal companies thus constitutes an important step towards greater economic 
resilience. In the event of a disaster, the municipal administration must also do its 
part for companies across the city to ensure the rapid and efficient recovery 
of business establishments.

Moreover, the movement of people and goods, whose effectiveness is an essential 
condition for the productivity of the economy as a whole, also represents a major 
issue for Montréal, due to its insular reality and the aging of its transportation 
infrastructures. That said, the transportation sector is undergoing profound 
change, with the continued development of the public transit network, the 
accelerated growth of active transportation (cycling, walking), the implementation 
of bike and car sharing systems, and so forth. The municipal administration must 
be inventive about ensuring the proper integration of new modes of transit that 
are effective and adapted to the needs of its broader community.

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  40      

 

I

A
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

3
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

OBJECTIVE A 
Promote a good state of preparedness among companies 
and business establishments in order to deal with disturbances 

ACTIONS 

16 Promote joint business continuity initiatives 

with medium-sized companies in Montréal

 

 

To better prepare companies to deal with various 
potential disturbances, the Bureau de la résilience, in 
close collaboration with the Service du développement 
économique and the PME Montréal network, has 
proposed that business leaders and business continuity 
stakeholders gather in the city in 2018 to devise an 
action plan aimed at:

•  Raising awareness of the importance of business 

continuity among medium-sized companies 
(companies with 100 to 499 employees) across the city;

•  Disseminate to these companies the revised version 

of the Guide en gestion de la continuité des activités 
pour les entreprises québécoises, published by 
the ministère de l’Économie, de la Science et de 
l’Innovation du Québec, and their online tools;

•  Support the development of targeted training for 

business owners and managers.

Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Service du 
développement économique/PME Montréal, Bureau 
de la résilience), Ministère de l’Économie, de la Science 
et de l’Innovation du Québec, École des entrepreneurs 
de Montréal, RECO-Québec, Chamber of Commerce of 
Metropolitan Montréal.

 

Time horizon: medium term

Montréal-based companies are the engines of 
our economy, from small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs) and self-employed workers to 
major multinational corporations, social economy 
enterprises and non-profit organizations (NPOs). All 
have a vital role to play in creating jobs and ensuring 
the vitality of Montréal’s social and economic 
development. Some companies manage essential 
infrastructures (energy, telecommunications, food 
production, etc.), while others produce goods and 
services that are important to Montrealers, but also to 
supply chains. Others still offer public gathering and 
entertainment spaces or act as powerful vectors of 
innovation in their respective sectors. 

When a disturbance occurs, a company’s activities 
are often disrupted. If not enough is done to take 
preventive action, an entire sector, and even the 
city’s economic diversity, can be affected over 
the longer term. The situation is particularly dire 
among SMEs, which account for a significant part of 
Québec’s economic fabric: in 2013, 70% of business 
establishments surveyed in the agglomeration of 
Montréal had fewer than 10 employees, according 
to the Statistics Canada Business Register. In contrast 
to large multinationals, SMEs often don’t have the 
human and financial resources to adequately develop 
their response capacity, yet they still face numerous 
potential disturbances: major power outage, 
cyberattack, fire, flooding, etc.

In Montréal, the floods in the spring of 2017 affected 
some 40 retail businesses, mainly in the borough 
of Pierrefonds-Roxboro. Some SMEs suffered major 
material damages, while others saw a considerable 
drop in sales. The municipal administration thus 
quickly established an emergency response plan for 
commercial establishments. 

 

41  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

 

I

 

B
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O
T
E
A
 
F
I
T
C
E
J
B
O

 

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

3
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

17 Adopt a planning process for the recovery 
of retail stores and business establishments

  Despite the establishment of business continuity 

measures by companies, some remain more at risk 
than others in the event of a disaster. Among small to 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) that occupy places 
of business, there is often a lack of knowledge of 
these risks with a corresponding shortage of resources 
for preventing them. In this context, the municipal 
administration has a role to play in supporting local 
businesses so that they can quickly resume their activities 
in the wake of a disaster.

 

 

The Bureau de la résilience, in collaboration with the 
Service du développement économique, the Direction de 
la sécurité civile et de la résilience (business continuity) 
and the Service de l’environnement (food inspection, 
industrial waste control), will initiate a planning process 
aimed at ensuring the recovery of businesses and 
establishments in the event of a disaster. This process will 
make it possible to:

•  Create a cross-disciplinary committee to set action 

priorities;

•  Propose a review of the financial framework 

legislation so as to create an emergency fund for 
businesses affected by an emergency situation;

•  Support steps undertaken by the Ministère de 

l’Économie, de la Science et de l’Innovation to ensure 
a coordinated response meant to facilitate a rapid 
return to business activities.

Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Bureau de la 
résilience, Service du développement économique, 
Direction de la sécurité civile et de la résilience, Service 
de l’environnement), ministère de l’Économie, de la 
Science et de l’Innovation.

 

Time horizon: short term

OBJECTIVE B 
Ensure the effective and secure  
movement of people and goods 

The movement of people and goods across the 
island of Montréal is an indissociable component 
of the city economic vitality. In addition, means of 
transportation structure the city’s development, 
and access to them determines the quality of life of 
citizens. With the dubious distinction of being the 
most congested city in Canada (38th in the world and 
first in Canada, according to INRIX 2017 Global Traffic 
Scorecard), Montréal faces some daunting challenges, 
and the presence of multiple levels of governance 
does nothing to simplify the management of traffic 
congestion.

The effective and safe movement of people across 
Montréal is connected to the performance of its 
transportation network (road, public transit, rail, 
air). As a North American leader when it comes to 
the modal share of active transportation and public 
transit (47% in 2008), Montréal relies on various 
heavy modes (commuter train, metro, SLR project) 
to ensure a resilient service, particularly in relation 
to climate constraints. However, aging facilities and 
equipment, coupled with growing demand and the 
evolution of transportation habits, require continued 
investments to effectively and safely meet users’ 
needs and expectations. Montréal and its partners 
have thus taken steps to offer multiple means of 
transportation to Montrealers as well as ensure 
their modernization (electrification, geolocation, 
surveillance cameras, etc.). In Montréal, a city 
spanning an area of close to 500 km2, the frequency 
of passage, equitable service, and improved access 
to specific neighbourhoods are among the issues 
specific to public transit network. The municipal 
administration is taking into account these challenges 
in an effort to ensure the adequate movement of the 
entire population of the island.

The Port of Montréal plays a central role in the 
movement of goods, in tandem with various actors in 
rail, road, maritime and air transportation, thereby 
providing national and international connections. 
The resulting exchanges require well honed logistics 
resistant to disturbances and constraints, including 
extreme climate events, road congestion and the 
multiplication of worksites. In addition, the growing 

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  42      

 

I

B
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

3
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

19 Develop a knowledge of logistics chains in 

Montréal and the risks associated with their 
interruption

 

 

 

 

The Port of Montréal is an important economic engine 
for the city, but also for Québec as a whole and for 
Canada. Taking their cue from the cities of Rotterdam 
and Norfolk, staff at the city’s Bureau de la résilience 
highlighted the importance of a partnership with the 
Montréal port authority administration.  

In order to foster greater knowledge of logistics chains 
operating across the city and to heighten awareness 
among stakeholders in critical economic sectors that 
could be affected by a disruption, the Bureau de la 
résilience will collaborate with the Port of Montréal to 
step up research and further develop its knowledge of 
the subject. The Bureau will also collaborate with key 
actors in order to:

•  Determine the economic impact exerted by the port 

of Montréal;  

•  Target the economic sectors and enterprises that are 

most vulnerable to potential disruptions;

•  Assess the impacts on Montréal’s population.

Principal partners: Montréal port authority, 
Ville de Montréal (Bureau de la résilience)  

Time horizon: medium term

transportation of hydrocarbons and other dangerous 
goods by road, pipeline and rail poses safety and 
economic development challenges. This issue was 
highlighted in dramatic fashion during the Lac-
Mégantic disaster of 2013. Finally, the transportation 
sector as a whole is currently undergoing major 
technological changes (smart mobility, self-driving or 
electric vehicles) that are ushering in a paradigm shift 
that holds immense potential, but is also fraught with 
risks associated with the destabilization of existing 
economic activities. 
ACTIONS 

18 Develop smart mobility solutions for daily use  

and emergencies

 

 

 

 

The Centre de gestion de la mobilité urbaine (CGMU) is 
a real-time decision-making centre created to facilitate 
mobility among citizens. Specialized equipment 
(cameras, “candlestick” priority traffic signals, variable 
message displays, etc.) allows the city to manage traffic 
on the road network remotely and react quickly when 
an incident occurs. For example, the CGMU ensures more 
effective coordination during festivals or large-scale 
events, and improved management of traffic in the 
vicinity of major work projects. The CGMU receives and 
issues information, notably concerning:

•  Real-time traffic signal management

•  Increased surveillance of the road network and 

infrastructures;

•  Timely information-sharing with partners, notably 
the Service de sécurité incendie de Montréal, the 
Société de transport de Montréal, the Ministère des 
Transports, de la Mobilité durable et de l’Électrification 
des transports, and the Centre de sécurité civile.

From this perspective, the CGMU, through the use of 
these digital solutions, also aims to:

•  Optimize the movement of emergency services in 

emergency situations;

•  Facilitate the dissemination of messages to pedestrians 

and motorists during large-scale events;

•  Facilitate and guide pedestrian and vehicle traffic 

during the evacuation of a specific sector.

Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Service des 
infrastructures, de la voirie et du transport, Centre de 
sécurité civile, Bureau de la résilience).

Time horizon: in progress

43  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

 

I

B
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

3
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

20 Develop a method for analyzing risks associated 

  Montréal in action: Building and operating 

with the transportation by rail of dangerous 
goods across the city 

sustainable and resilient public transit buildings 
and infrastructures

 

 

 

 

The risk of an accident involving the transportation 
of dangerous goods has become a subject of broad 
public concern, particularly since the Lac-Mégantic 
disaster in July 2013. As well provoke a reassessment 
by authorities and risk management specialists, the 
Lac-Mégantic disaster changed public perceptions of rail 
and industrial risk. The event also led to the adoption 
of Protective Direction 32, which was replaced by the 
federal government’s Protective Direction 36 requiring 
that rail companies share information on the type and 
volume of dangerous goods transported within the limits 
of a municipality. These data are used to plan emergency 
measures and responses. 

The Centre de sécurité civile is currently working to 
develop a method for analyzing the risks associated 
with the transportation of dangerous goods by rail. The 
Center will determine the:

•  Probability of the presence of a source;

  Under its new Sustainable Development Plan, the Société 

de transport de Montréal (STM) has erred in favour of 
actions that will make it possible to build and operate 
sustainable and resilient buildings and infrastructures  
(Priority 2)

  Out of a concern with building quality facilities, reducing 

its environmental footprint and optimizing the benefits 
for local communities, the STM has made a commitment 
to target sustainable development certifications for its 
buildings in large infrastructure projects. Given the risks 
associated with climate change, notably heavy rains, 
flooding, heat waves and destructive storms, the STM is 
taking various measures to mitigate vulnerability across 
its network, ensure user safety, and maintain services 
in the event of extreme weather. In order to curb heat 
island effects, the STM, where possible, is integrating 
greening measures into its construction or renovation 
projects.

•  Probability of exposure;

•  Vulnerability to impacts.

Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Centre de 
sécurité civile, Bureau de la résilience), and other 
partners to be determined.

Time horizon: long term

 

Inspiration: Sweden/Vision Zero

  Since 1997, the Vision Zero approach has proven its 

worth on the road network in Sweden. Starting from 
the principal that no one should perish or sustain serious 
injury when travelling the streets, Vision Zero suggests 
actions across a range of components of the road traffic 
system in order to guarantee the safety of all road 
users: pedestrians, cyclists, drivers and passengers of all 
ages and under all conditions. Various dimensions must 
be taken into consideration, all of which demand the 
attention of the parties concerned. These include the 
planning, design and management of infrastructures, 
regulatory provisions, surveillance and control tools, 
technological innovations, and education and awareness 
initiatives.

  Why is Montréal adopting Vision Zero? With a very 
positive road safety record compared to other large 
cities around the world, Montréal has chosen to further 
prioritize human life by adopting this effective road 
strategy across the city.

  The measures put forward since the adoption of the 

Plan de transport in 2008 have made it possible to 
reduce fatal accidents and serious injuries by more than 
50%. The Vision Zero deaths and injuries approach is a 
continuation of that initial thrust. What’s more, Montréal 
stands apart by virtue of its growing share of bicycle and 
pedestrian transportation, which is why the municipal 
administration is bringing a special focus to bear on 
vulnerable users, such as pedestrians and cyclists.

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  44      

 

I

C
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

3
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

OBJECTIVE C 
 Anticipate socioeconomic challenges and capitalize  
on knowledge and creativity assets 

The relative state of poverty affecting the broader 
Montréal community already exerts pressure on the 
city’s resilience. Current trends point to renewed 
challenges in this regard, with demographic forecasts 
indicating that regional population growth will 
slow between now and 2031, even as the aging of 
the population continues. These trends have led to 
difficulties related to labour force adaptation and 
the distribution of wealth, which are evidenced 
concretely in increased numbers of disadvantaged 
groups: the homeless, people living alone, single-
parent families, workers paid below the low income 
cut-off, and so on. The effects of this phenomenon 
are felt, in particular, across Montréal’s specialized 
services, including in mental health hospitals, adapted 
care and transportation services, and in organizations 
for people with functional limitations. The offer of 
specialized services not yet available in other Québec 
regions has served to concentrate populations with 
special needs in the city and is likely to affect the city’s 
capacity to deal with a shock.

Moreover, Montréal is home to the largest population 
of international immigrants in Québec, and the city 
welcomes the majority of new immigrants. In 2016, 
some 38,000 permanent residents and more than 
70,000 temporary residents arrived in Montréal. 
This population influx has radically transformed 
Montréal’s landscape and economy. In 2015 and 
2016, the municipal administration played a vital 
role in receiving Syrian refugees across the city, in 
collaboration with numerous social and community 
groups. This situation highlighted the needs on the 
ground and prompted the creation of the Bureau 
d’intégration des nouveaux arrivants de Montréal 
in 2016. However, the improved integration of 
immigrants, particularly into the workforce, remains 
a priority concern for the economic development 
of the city.

ACTIONS 

21 Promote the resilient and sustainable 
development of Montréal’s economy

  Montréal has a diversified economy, a skilled and 

multilingual workforce, a social climate and quality of 
life that are favourable to investment, and high-calibre 
university infrastructures.

In order to maintain and capitalize on these assets, the 
municipal administration must develop the economy’s 
adaptation capacity to deal with current and emerging 
challenges, including:

•  The aging of the city’s population and infrastructures;

•  The integration of immigrants and visible minorities 

into the job market;

•  The transition towards new and more sustainable 

economic models (sharing economy, circular 
economy, etc.);

•  School perseverance;

•  Training-employment matching;

•  The retention of international students.

In order to achieve these objectives, the Bureau de la 
résilience, in collaboration with its partners, wishes to 
hold a series of conferences on these issues so as to:

•  Present the notion of economic resilience as well as 
the resilience indicators and factors that contribute 
to it in Montréal, as well as the social, economic and 
environmental challenges that lie ahead;

•  Promote best local and international practices, notably 

in connection with work carried out by the post-
industrial cities committee in the city of Glasgow 
(100 Resilient Cites network);

•  Support and publicize proactive actions undertaken by 

the city and its partners in this area.

Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Bureau de la 
résilience, Service du développement économique, 
Bureau du développement durable), Techno Montréal 
and other potential partners, including the Chamber of 
Commerce of Metropolitan Montréal.

Time horizon:  long term

 

 

 

 

 

45  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

 

I

C
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

3
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

  Montréal in action: Integrating immigrants 

into the job market

  The Intégration-Travail-Formation (Integration-Work-

Training) pilot project is an initiative of the city’s Bureau 
d’intégration des nouveaux arrivants à Montréal 
(BINAM), implemented in collaboration with the 
Government of Québec and the Chamber of Commerce 
of Metropolitan Montréal (CCMM). Thus far, as part 
of this project, four large Montréal-based companies 
have made a commitment to offer temporary paid work 
to qualified immigrants in Montréal for a significant 
period and to offer them individualized integration and 
training. This project’s general objective is to accelerate 
the integration of qualified new immigrants into 
positions that meet their level of qualification and skills.

   Specific objectives of the initiative:

•  Offer significant work experience in a large company 

to a cohort of 12 to 15 newly arrived, qualified 
workers, with up to 52 weeks of work;

•  Implement a professional mentorship program within 

companies;

•  Offer refresher training to meet the specific needs of 

each participant.

  Added value for participating companies:

•  Access to wage subsidies from Services Québec, up to 

the minimum wage (a first for large employers);

•  Promotion of positions in multiple vast networks (Ville 

de Montréal, CCMM, employment agencies, etc.);

•  Financial support from Services Québec for refresher 

training;

•  Training in communications and intercultural 

management offered by the city.

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  46      

I

4
 
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

TAKE ACTION TO PROMOTE INTEGRATED GOVERNANCE 
IN THE SERVICE OF THE COMMUNITY

Managing major disturbances across the city is always likely to involve multiple 
authorities. Vulnerabilities that can affect the exercise of leadership and the 
effectiveness of actions taken daily or in emergency situations may include 
cumbersome administration, complex structures, the difficulty of establishing 
cross-sectoral channels of communication, and the lack of a shared risk 
management culture.

Events such as the major snowstorm and the floods in early 2017 highlighted the 
need to review our preparation for catastrophes and the coordination of the 
various actors and authorities concerned.

Over and above the importance of ensuring the availability of means and 
resources and the community’s state of preparedness, an integrated governance 
structure is a must. That governance structure should favour an exhaustive 
knowledge, anticipation and sharing of risks, and a quality coordinated response 
by various actors to disturbances likely to affect the living conditions and safety 
of citizens. Elements that are key to building a city’s resilience include clear 
decision-making processes, effective collaboration, interactive communication and 
increased coordination between various stakeholders.

In order to address issues related to the coordination of organizations involved 
in public safety, action must be taken on several levels. Horizontal integration 
must be established to promote improved coordination between municipal 
departments, establish working ties between various stakeholders across the 
city, and draw on lessons learned in the wake of a disaster. Additionally, efforts 
must be made to better organize vertical integration internally – between central 
services, the boroughs and the broader community – and externally, with other 
levels of public administration (federal, provincial and regional).

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  48      

 

I

A
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

4
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

OBJECTIVE A 
Ensure the city’s adequate state of preparedness in relation  
to natural and anthropogenic risks  

ACTIONS 

22 Assess the agglomeration of Montréal’s state 

of preparedness and train municipal employees

 

Each year, the Centre de sécurité civile reports on the 
agglomeration of Montréal’s state of preparedness for a 
disaster. The report is based on a set of indicators, which 
will be reviewed. Indeed, indicators of resilience and 
business continuity will be added in order to provide a 
more complete picture of the agglomeration’s state of 
preparedness. Steps were taken to:

•  Develop assessment indicators;

•  Prepare and disseminate the assessment questionnaire;

•  Compile results and produce an annual report.

  After more than 800 hours of training spanning three 

years, meant to allow all municipal employees to become 
more aware of risks and the importance of the state of 
preparedness, the municipal administration developed 
an initial online training course. This first step will 
make it possible, over the longer term, to offer multiple 
training courses to the city’s 28,000 employees and 
eventually the entire population of Montréal. Steps were 
taken to:

•  Acquire an online software application;

•  Develop online training;

•  Disseminate the training on the city’s platforms.

 

 

Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Centre de 
sécurité civile, Service des technologies de l’information, 
Bureau de la résilience).

Time horizon: medium term

In addition to the risk posed by extreme weather 
events, Montréal faces a number of technological, 
biological and social risks. In collaboration with its 
partners, the municipal administration must prepare 
accordingly, be it for a terrorist threat, an industrial 
accident or a pandemic. 

To ensure its proper preparation, the municipal 
administration is being proactive about knowing the 
risks, training, planning, and staging preparation 
exercises. As part of the implementation of its 
strategy, several activities will be developed to ensure 
that the city is adequately prepared and to anticipate 
and be aware of the increased risks in connection 
with vulnerabilities, impacts and hazards. This state 
of preparedness is reviewed annually using indicators 
to prioritize responses.

Above and beyond proper preparation for purposes 
of anticipating an emergency response, the city 
must develop and increase its learning capacity 
subsequent to a shock so that it can better target 
future responses and the necessary prevention and 
mitigation activities. The municipal administration 
is establishing mechanisms to protect its citizens, 
companies and ecosystems, and continue to offer 
services in the event of a major event.

To ensure the resumption of critical activities and 
services should they be affected by an emergency 
situation, the city established a business continuity 
program in 2016 aimed primarily at analyzing 
vulnerabilities and prioritizing its activities and 
services. Its goal is to identify critical activities and 
services and the maximum acceptable interruption 
thereof. Business continuity plans will then be 
developed for the activities and services most 
susceptible to interruption. 

49  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

 

I

A
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

4
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

23 Promote business continuity at the city

24 Produce an index of socioeconomic vulnerability 

  With the goal of integrating business continuity into its 

strategic planning and its operational and organizational 
culture, the municipal administration took steps, in 2016, 
to create a business continuity program. By drawing 
on standards in the field and collaborating with the 
concerned departments, the Direction de la sécurité 
civile et de la résilience adapted a business continuity 
methodology to the city’s operational realities.

 

The implementation of business continuity will include 
the following steps:

•  Adoption of a continuity policy;

•  Development of initial continuity plans for the first 

five participating departments;

•  Development of the first continuity plans for four 

boroughs;

•  Expansion of the program to other municipal 

departments and boroughs.

 

Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Direction de la 
sécurité civile et de la résilience, Service des technologies 
de l’information, Service de l’eau, Service de sécurité 
incendie de Montréal, Service de police de la Ville de 
Montréal, Service des ressources humaines/division de 
la paie, the boroughs of Verdun, Plateau Mont-Royal, 
Rivière-des-Prairies–Pointe-aux-Trembles, and Montréal-
Nord)

 

Time horizon: long term

in Montréal

  An index of socioeconomic vulnerability assesses and 
classifies a community’s vulnerability to catastrophes, 
specifically as it relates to its capacity to mitigate 
and adapt to various types of environmental and 
anthropogenic shocks. Analyzing spatial distribution on 
the social vulnerability index makes it possible to target 
priority sectors for prevention and action on a day-to-day 
basis and during major disasters.

 

 

 

 

The Bureau de la résilience will collaborate with the 
Centre de sécurité civile and 100 Resilient Cities to 
develop a socioeconomic vulnerability index using 
statistical methods and analyzing spatial distribution 
in relation to the index. Major steps in the project will 
consist of:

•  Identifying the climate hazards required for the index;

•  Identifying vulnerability indicators;

•  Compiling statistical data;

•  Producing a statistical analysis of vulnerability 

indicators;

•  Mapping the results.

The results of this analysis will be used for several 
projects, including a project to draw up a risk overview 
for Montréal, and another project to identify priority 
sectors for response, prevention and risk awareness.

Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Bureau de la 
résilience), Aecom, 100 Resilient Cities.

Time horizon: in progress

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  50      

 

I

A
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

4
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

25 Produce an overview of potential risks  

26 Establish multi-risk monitoring in Montréal

across the city

 

The Centre de sécurité civile and the Bureau de la 
résilience will begin the process of establishing a risk 
overview for Montréal. In order to do so, an analysis 
of vulnerabilities, hazards and their potential impacts, 
with the elements categorized so as to prioritize the 
required response and mitigation measures. These efforts 
will be aimed chiefly at mitigating the impacts and 
vulnerabilities specific to Montréal’s population and its 
infrastructures. The implementation steps will consist of:  

•  Updating data on hazards that could affect Montréal;

•  Producing an analysis of the impacts specific to the 

hazards identified;

•  Assessing vulnerabilities across the city;

•  Producing an analysis and an overview of risks  

in Montréal.

  Once the risk overview is updated, the Centre de sécurité 

civile and the Bureau de la résilience will:

•  Update or develop emergency response plans for 

priority risks;

•  Assess mitigation measures that could reduce impacts;

•  Establish programs to reduce vulnerabilities across  

the city.

 

 

Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Centre de 
sécurité civile, Bureau de la résilience), and other 
partners to be determined.

Time horizon: long term

 

City departments have access to monitoring, assessment 
and analysis mechanisms to track and detect problem 
situations or anticipate events that could affect part of 
the population. Current monitoring efforts are spread 
out across several structures within the municipal 
organization. The Direction de la sécurité civile et de 
la résilience intends to create a multi-risk monitoring 
centre mandated to anticipate events more quickly and 
effectively, mobilize the concerned actors, and collate 
all monitoring data. This centre will make it possible to 
gain a comprehensive and accurate picture of situations 
presenting minor impacts with the potential to become 
major impacts.

  Major steps in the project:

•  Research and assess systems and procedures used in 

Canada and globally;

•  Form a committee with the relevant actors in order to 

identify the most effective mechanisms for Montréal 
for purposes of listing, validating, sharing and 
following up on this information;

•  Develop a working and exchange method with centres 

of expertise for the various risks with the objective 
of consolidating forecast capacity for the benefit of 
decision-makers and the population;

•  Identify notification methods for each type of alert 
or warning, based on a target population and the 
adequacy of tools principle;

•  Develop a mobilization protocol for stakeholders with 

civil security organizations within the agglomeration 
of Montréal.

  A Bureau de la résilience pilot project is already 

underway, and its objective is to develop a dashboard for 
meteorological risks. This software application will serve 
to track forecasts and probable impact thresholds online, 
and issue alerts to emergency responders.

 

Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Bureau de la 
résilience, Centre de sécurité civile, Ville intelligente et 
numérique, Service des technologies de l’information, 
Centre de gestion de la mobilité urbaine, Service de 
police de la Ville de Montréal, Service de sécurité 
incendie de Montréal, Service de l’environnement), 
Direction de la santé publique, Environment and Climate 
Change Canada, Wood, 100 Resilient Cities, citizens, and 
others to be determined.

 

Time horizon: medium term

51  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

 

I

B
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

4
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

OBJECTIVE B 
Collaborate and share expertise in order to promote  
informed decision-making 

Crisis situations require timely decision-making 
based on the information available at the time with 
the objective of ensuring public protection. But 
proper prevention and planning, ahead of time, 
make it possible to better manage situations and 
provide effective coordination under emergency 
circumstances.

Chronic and major urban issues, such as road 
congestion and homelessness, also require decision-
making based on targeted analysis, together with 
planning and collaborative work to determine the 
proper action strategies. In the short term, the choices 
made and the actions implemented by authorities and 
their partners thus exert an impact on the safety of 
citizens, while in the long term, they exert an impact 
on their quality of life.

Additionally, these decisions must draw on scientific, 
professional and technical knowledge. The 
municipal administration, owing to its proximity 
to citizens and its responsibilities as a manager of 
living environments, has a key role to play in these 
decisions. In this context, the city must continue 
to develop a comprehensive municipal planning 
approach and improve collaboration between 
departments ahead of disruptive events, with 
the goal of taking joint action with other public 
authorities and key partners. This joint planning must 
respect the jurisdictions of each and place citizens at 
the heart of the decision-making process.

The municipal administration, moreover, must 
continue to promote its capacity for feedback 
and knowledge transfer in relation to disruptive 
events, and it must be able to detect vulnerabilities 
in existing coordination processes for purposes of 
improving the way it operates.

ACTIONS 

27 Consolidate the Bureau de la résilience’s 

mission and systematize collaboration and 
resilient solutions 

 

In order to implement a comprehensive and consistent 
vision of resilience in Montréal, the Bureau de la 
résilience is playing an active part in consultations with 
municipal and paramunicipal departments. In the short 
term, the Bureau de la résilience will collaborate on the 
development of:

•  The second action plan put forward by the Bureau de 

la ville intelligente et numérique;

•  The action plan put forward under the Social 

Development Policy issued by the Service de la 
diversité sociale et des sports;

•  The review of the agglomeration of Montréal’s Civil 

Security Policy;

•  Research and development projects put forward by 

the Service des technologies de l’information.

  Moreover, to ensure the effective collaboration between 

various municipal departments and other levels of 
government, as well as the sharing of expertise on 
current and future files, the Bureau de la résilience will 
establish three new cross-disciplinary committees in the 
following areas:  

•  Planning methods, standards and rules for resilient 

construction and green infrastructures;

•  Planning the recovery of retails stores and business 

establishments;

•  Adaptation of critical infrastructures to climate 

change.

 

Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Bureau de la 
résilience, Service de la mise en valeur du territoire, 
Service de l’environnement, Service du développement 
économique, Service de l’eau, Service des infrastructures, 
de la voirie et des transports, Bureau de la ville 
intelligente et numérique, Service de la diversité sociale 
et des sports), and other external partners.

 

Time horizon: medium term

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  52      

 

I

B
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

4
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

28 Develop resilience indicators  

29 Further develop and share knowledge about 

urban resilience 

 

 

 

The municipal administration is committed to sharing 
knowledge gained from the 100 Resilient Cities program 
and the development and implementation of Montréal’s 
Resilient City Strategy. The Bureau de la résilience will 
thus take part in symposiums and conferences, sit on 
committees, work with professional associations, and 
draft articles. As well, the Bureau de la résilience will:  

•  Participate in the Cité-ID LivingLab Gouvernance de la 

résilience urbaine established by the École nationale 
d’administration publique (Énap);

•  Maintain ties with cities in the 100 Resilient Cities 
network, specifically with the three participating 
Canadian cities (Calgary, Vancouver and Toronto) so as 
to ensure effective sharing of emerging best practices 
in resilience;

•  Participate in the network of large Canadian cities 

involved in emergency preparedness.

Principal partners: Calgary, Toronto, Vancouver, 
Halifax, Winnipeg, Edmonton, Regina, Ottawa, 
Saskatoon, École nationale d’administration publique

Time horizon: in progress

 

 

 

 

 

To measure the progress of resilience in Montréal, the 
Bureau de la résilience has given itself a mandate to 
develop indicators of resilience on two levels: overall 
indicators for the agglomeration of Montréal, and 
specific indicators for each action set out in Montréal’s 
Resilient City Strategy.

The indicators will be developed in part using the City 
Resilience index (CRI), a tool provided by 100 Resilient 
Cities and Arup. The CRI tool is intended to help cities 
in the network understand and measure resilience in a 
systematic manner applicable on a global scale. Designed 
as a self-evaluation, the online CRI tool generates a 
resilience profile detailing a city’s specific strengths and 
weaknesses, by creating a basis upon which to plan and 
measure future progress. In order to complete the CRI, 
the Bureau de la résilience will

•  collect the statistical data required for the CRI;

•  Produce a data analysis and analyze the results;

•  Disseminate specific indicators and results in the report 

on the agglomeration’s state of preparedness..

In a second phase meant to ensure follow-up and 
measure the effectiveness of actions undertaken as part 
of the strategy, performance indicators will be developed 
with the concerned partners. This follow-up and 
assessment will make it possible to make adjustments 
during the review of the action plan. 

Principle partners: Ville de Montréal (Bureau de la 
résilience), 100 Resilient Cities, Arup, and other partners.

Time horizon: in progress

  Montréal in action: Event report and feedback – 

2017 floods: Making Montréal a community that’s 
resilient to flooding 

•  Improve the state of preparedness of various 

responders in case of flooding;

•  Improve coordination between responders;

  The city’s Direction de la sécurité civile et de la résilience 
produced a report with recommendations, summarizing 
the main observations and lessons learned during the 
response in the spring of 2017. This report was issued in 
the wake of a feedback session held in June 2017, and 
its goal was to make the agglomeration of Montréal 
more resilient to flooding by improving the state of 
preparedness of responders and fostering more extensive 
knowledge of risk at the city.

  The main recommendations issued in this report concern 

the following main objectives:

•  Improve our knowledge of risk and the potential 
impacts in order to establish mitigation measures;

•  Improve communication with disaster victims, 

vulnerable people and the population in general, by 
reviewing the communications plan and the tools used 
to deal with flooding;

•  Improve support to employees of the agglomeration 
of Montréal through the development of workforce 
succession plans between boroughs/reconstituted cities 
in conjunction with emergency measures;

•  Improve the state of preparedness of corporate 

citizens in the agglomeration so as to optimize the 
recovery of retails stores and business establishments.

53  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

 

I

C
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

4
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

OBJECTIVE C 
Establish interactive communications between authorities and the public 
so as to disseminate information daily and alert citizens in the event of a disaster 

Montréal is home to people from 120 countries, 
and those people speak close to 200 languages. This 
reality lies behind one of the leading challenges 
facing Montréal: communicating with citizens 
on a daily basis and in emergency situations. 
Communication platforms are evermore diversified, 
amid a rapidly changing media landscape where 
information is shared in real time. Citizens expect 
to receive information instantaneously, particularly 
during a major event. The city must rethink its 
communication strategy and modernize and adapt 
the tools at its disposal so as to meet Montrealers’ 
expectations on a day-to-day basis and in emergency 
situations.

In addition to dissemination tools and means, the 
municipal administration must review the content 
and format of the messages it issues to prepare 
citizens for catastrophes. These messages do not 
seem to be reaching their target: often, the majority 
of Montrealers never hear them, or the message is 
misunderstood. The promotion of the 72-hour kit is 
the most striking example of this communications 
failure: all levels of government have used this 
prevention message for several years, yet the 
percentage of Montrealers who read it and prepared 
the kit remains very low.

ACTIONS 

30 Rethink the risks communication to citizens

  AWARENESS MESSAGES 
 

The Bureau de la résilience and the Centre de sécurité 
civile have an objective to review messages and risk 
awareness tools geared to citizens in order to inform 
them about their role and their required state of 
preparedness. In this context, the Bureau de la résilience 
teamed up with the Université de Montréal and the 
Ministère de la Sécurité publique with the goal of 
enhancing the scope of this project and the results.  

 

This research project has two main objectives:

•  Define a range of complementary and adapted 

awareness tools;

•  Develop a strategy to disseminate these awareness 

tools.

  Major steps in the implementation of the project:

•  Draw up a picture of the perception of risk among 

citizens using interviews and online surveys;

•  Define the set of communications tools with discussion 

groups made up of citizens and experts;

•  Produce an implementation feasibility study for 

the new communications tools and develop a 
dissemination strategy.

  MEANS OF COMMUNICATION

  New communications technologies can be used to 

improve the dissemination of data on risks and alerts to 
the public in the event of disasters. These technologies 
must be used more effectively by responders to ensure 
that a good state of preparedness exists among 
Montrealers. Improved new tools are under development 
at the municipal level:

•  Notices and Alerts service;

•  Open data portal;

•  Community alert service;

•  Alert sirens in case of a toxic spill.

  As well, starting in April 2018, federal and provincial 

authorities, in case of imminent danger, will be able to 
use the Québec en alerte system to issue a sound alert 
broadcast simultaneously on the smart phones of all 
people in a given sector. A bilingual banner with a short 
message will appear on the device screen and a specific 
vibration will be triggered. 

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  54      

 

I

C
E
V
T
C
E
J
B
O

 
 
|
 
 

 

I

4
N
O
T
A
T
N
E
R
O

I

 

 

 

The Centre de sécurité civile will ensure the interface 
between the communications systems and those used by 
other levels of government in order to issue timely alerts 
to the population of Montréal more effectively.

Principal partners: Ville de Montréal (Bureau de 
la résilience, Centre de sécurité civile, Services des 
communications), ministère de la Sécurité publique du 
Québec, Université de Montréal, and other partners.

Time horizon: in progress

  Montréal in action: Urban displays of preventive 

notices and emergency alerts

  Digital display terminals are an increasingly familiar 

sight in Montréal. These technological tools can serve to 
complement traditional tools in emergency situations 
and quickly reach a large number of Montrealers in 
the four corners of the city. The Centre de gestion de la 
mobilité urbaine and the Direction de la sécurité civile 
et de la résilience are in the process of negotiating an 
agreement pertaining to their use.

  The telecommunications giant, Bell Canada, a long-

standing civil security partner in Montréal, is also 
initiating a pilot project in this area. The company 
expects to transform and update its old telephone 
booths across the city. As part of Montréal à pied, a 
project put forward by Faire Montréal, Bell will retrofit 
its urban furniture by integrating WiFi, a smart phone 
charging station, an LTE terminal, and integrated 
cameras. In addition, the company intends to offer 
civil security authorities the option of changing the 
announcements on these display screens for purposes of 
posting notices to citizens in emergency situations (e.g., 
active shooter, AMBER alerts, boil water advisories, etc.). 
An initial pilot project is underway on Nun’s Island.

55  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

IMPLEMENTATION

To help build an alert and proactive community and better anticipate and collectively adapt to growing 
social, economic and environmental challenges, Montréal’s Resilient City Strategy is supported by a 
concrete five-year action plan that calls for an interim report to be issued in 2020. This assessment will 
provide an opportunity to make adjustments and improvements, where required. 

Once the strategy is tabled, follow-up and assessment indicators will be developed to produce the interim 
report and assess the actions implemented. The Bureau de la résilience will collect data on these indicators, 
in collaboration with partners of Montréal’s Resilient City Strategy as well as municipal departments  
and boroughs.

The 100 Resilient Cities network will support the work of the Bureau de la résilience in this area, using the 
City Resilience Index (CRI) developed by ARUP. This index was developed specifically to measure and assess 
urban resilience over an extended period of time. It embodies a comprehensive vision of the city structured 
around four major categories, 12 objectives, and 52 indicators. The CRI was not devised to compare 
different cities in the 100 Resilient Cities network, but it can serve as a common basis of measurement  
to facilitate the sharing of best practices.

An action plan follow-up committee will be tasked with observing the implementation. 
This committee will be made up of representatives of the city as well as Montréal-based stakeholders 
specialized in resilience. 

STRATÉGIE MONTRÉALAISE POUR UNE VILLE RÉSILIENTE  I  JUIN 2018  I  56      

57  I  MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018       

LIST OF ORGANIZATIONS THAT PARTICIPATED IN THE DEVELOPMENT  
OF THE STRATEGY

100 Resilient Cities

Aecom

Office municipale d’habitation de Montréal (OMHM)

Ouranos consortium

Association industrielle de l’Est de Montréal (AIEM)

Plateau Mont-Royal borough

Bell Canada

Brodeur Frenette

Polytechnique de Montréal

RECO-Québec

Bureau de la ville intelligente et numérique

Réseau de transport métropolitain

Bureau d’intégration des nouveaux arrivants à Montréal

Rivière-des-Prairies–Pointe-aux-Trembles borough

Bureau du développement durable

Saint-Laurent borough

Canadian Red Cross

Centraide

Service du développement économique

Service de l’environnement

Chamber of Commerce of Metropolitan Montréal 

Service de la diversité sociale et des sports

CIUSSS du centre-Sud-de-l’île-de-Montréal

Concordia University

City of Calgary – Resilient Calgary

City of Toronto – Resilient Toronto

City of Vancouver – Resilient Vancouver

Côte-des-Neiges–Notre-Dame-de-Grâce borough

Direction de la gestion stratégique des réseaux d’eau –  
Division gestion durable de l’eau

Direction des Transports – Division de l’exploitation 
du réseau artériel

Direction de la santé publique de Montréal

École des entrepreneurs de Montréal

École nationale d’administration publique

Energir (Gaz Métro)

Environment and Climate Change Canada

Groupe uni des éducateurs-naturalistes et professionnels 
en environnement (GUEPE)

Hydro-Québec

Institut national de santé publique du Québec (INSPQ)

Kheops consortium

Major Industrial Accident Reduction Council  (MIARC) 

Maison de l’innovation sociale

Ministère de l’Économie, de la Science et de l’Innovation  
du Québec

Montréal-Nord bourough

Montréal Port Authority

Service de la mise en valeur du territoire – 
Direction de l’urbanisme

Service de police de la Ville de Montréal

Service de sécurité incendie de Montréal – 
Direction de la prévention et de la planification

Service de sécurité incendie de Montréal – 
Direction de la sécurité civile et de la résilience

Service des affaires juridiques

Service des communications

Service des technologies de l’information

Smart Cybersecurity Network (Serene Risc)

Société d’habitation et de développement de Montréal 
(SHDM)

Société de transport de Montréal

Sud-Ouest borough

Sun Youth

Table de concertation des organismes aux services 
des personnes réfugiées et immigrantes

Techno Montréal

Transition NDG

Université de Montréal

Université du Québec à Montréal

Urgences-santé

Verdun borough

Ville de Montréal-Est

Wood extreme weather forecasting

The city’s Bureau de la résilience wishes to thank all the individuals who were involved directly or indirectly 
in the development of Montréal’s Resilient City Strategy. 

MONTRÉAL’S RESILIENT CITY STRATEGY  I  JUNE 2018  I  58      

)
8
1
-
6
0
(
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
n
u
m
m
o
c
 
s
e
d
 
e
c
i
v
r
e
S
 
,
l
a
é
r
t
n
o
M
 
e
d
 
e

l
l
i

V

resilient.montreal.ca

