A CO-CREATION EXERCISE
TO STRATEGICALLY ADDRESS THE 
FUTURE OF MEDELLÍN

Produced with support from:

M E D E L L Í N   R E S I L I E N T E

P I O N E E R E D   B Y  T H E   R O C K E F E L L E R   F O U N D AT I O N

4

5

A CITY THAT
TRANSFORMS ITSELF 
FOR ITS PEOPLE

“Resilient” is perhaps the most beautiful and complete adjective that we can use to 
describe Medellín, because everything else derives from it. Medellín is an innovative, 
inclusive and forward-thinking city. However, all this has only been possible because 
of our capacity to overcome the obstacles that we have faced over time.

“Medellín” is set in a valley surrounded by steep mountains, so settling there was 
and continues to be a fairly complicated task. After it was founded, here was a long 
period of violence, and we lived in fear. However, even in the darkest days, we never 
stopped believing in our city. It was thanks to the communities’ commitment that we 
managed to progress. The citizens embraced Medellín and transformed it. 

Now we know that we have come a long way, but that there is still a lot to do. We want 
a safe, equitable and sustainable city, and to achieve this, we are working on a public 
management model based on citizen trust.  If we can trust in others, in society and 
in the State, we can say that Medellín works, because everyone does their part and 
receives what they deserve. 

To build the city that we dream of and that we believe in, we have always worked as 
a team with companies, universities, and other organizations who all contribute to 
the task. One of our great partners has undoubtedly been the Resilience Office. With 
the support of this great network of 100 Resilient Cities Pioneered by the Rockefeller 
Foundation, we have included the concept of resilience in our development plan as 
an innovative approach that views the city’s exposure to risks and vulnerabilities and 
transforms them into opportunities that will be the driving force of new progress.

Just like life, the city is built by looking to the future. We may fall, but we always have 
to get back up again. When we doubt whether it is worth it, we need to look back for 
a moment, which will give us the confidence that if we have come this far, we can go 
much further. 

Federico Gutiérrez Zuluaga
MAYOR OF MEDELLÍN

MEDELLÍN
A GREAT EXAMPLE
OF RESILIENCE

100 Resilient Cities is extremely pleased to continue our partnership with Medellin, a city leading 
the way in urban transformation and resilience for Latin America and the world. As we celebrate 
the release of the city’s Resilience Strategy, Medellin steps forward once again. This strategy 
exemplifies the holistic and award-winning thinking that Medellin has become known for globally. 

This strategy would not have been possible without the support and leadership of Mayor 
Gutiérrez, who has embraced the resilience agenda. Mayor Gutierrez and his team have shown 
a commitment to the far-reaching efforts of this strategy to bring resilience to every corner of 
Medellin.  We must extend additional thanks to the city’s Chief Resilience Officer, Santiago Uribe, 
and his team, including Laura Acevedo, Knowledge Manager, and Oscar Cardona, Manager of 
Communications, who helped to lay the foundation for this inspiring Resilience Strategy.

Medellin has gone through a remarkable transformation, but remains dedicated to learning 
from and exchanging with the world as the city continues to innovate at home – neighborhood 
by neighborhood. This strategy is a testament to that dedication. The Medellin resilience team, 
the Mayor’s office, the City Council, and the comunas themselves have contributed to a highly 
integrated resilience strategy that is also reflective of the larger changes in the city.  That 
includes a set of initiatives that have influenced the newly released city’s development plan 
(2016-2019) and vice versa, creating a dynamic set of strategic actions that reinforce one 
another to build holistic resilience throughout Medellin. 

This Resilience Strategy’s four goals and related initiatives represent the resilience agenda in 
all its breadth and depth- from youth participation in science, technology, and innovation at 
a neighborhood level to developing a comprehensive risk reduction and public education plan 
for disaster; from strengthening the livelihoods and lifestyles of women and girls to revitalizing 
the river through economic, cultural, environmental, and social means. As such, this strategy 
strengthens the overall resilience of the city to withstand the shocks and stresses that will likely 
still occur. Medellin has enhanced its ability to plan, prevent, respond and prosper, built on a 
foundation two years’ in the making – through research and stakeholder engagement across
the city and region. 

But the release of this strategy does not represent the finish line. It is another important step for 
the city of Medellin, and Colombia as a whole, to pivot to a new, vibrant, and peaceful future. 

We were pleased to be on hand when Medellin was honored at the 2016 World Cities Summit in 
Singapore with the Lee Kuan Yew World City Prize – a true acknowledgement of the innovation 
this city has spurred in the past few decades. We look forward to the many successes and 
innovations ahead in Medellin, building upon the work recognized by this prestigious award and 
contained within the city’s Resilience Strategy.

Sincerely,

Michael Berkowitz
PRESIDENT, 100 RESILIENT CITIES

Resilient MedellínResilient MedellínTHE WORLD
BREAKS EVERYONE,

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

AND AFTERWARD
MANY ARE STRONG
AT THE BROKEN PLACES.

Ernest Hemingway

8

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

shocks and stresses facing the city to convert these risks 
into challenges, and a driving force for change.

Our strategy’s approach is structured around four 
ambitious goals supported by actions that will achieve 
our vision of  a Resilient Medellín:

Equitable Medellín

To achieve the dream of an equitable city, we need to 
strengthen and create new strategies for educating 
citizens that will facilitate access to new opportunities 
tailored to the needs of different  city contexts.

The actions in this document start by recognizing 
diversity and inclusion, so that people are part of the 
transformation of the city.

We establish the goal of an Equitable Medellin with the 
intention of creating educational and training projects, 
to develop and improve citizens’ life skills, and their 
psychosocial and emotional capacity, especially of the 
city’s young people. 
 
The creation of new jobs and enterprises, will be 
nurtured through the promotion of culture, recreation 
and sports,  and through  art, science and technology 
education,  creating a more resilient people.

Often known for its dark and stormy past, Medellín 
has risen like a phoenix from its own ashes to become 
a global example of urban and social transformation 
today. 

Almost three decades ago, no one would have thought 
that Medellín would have managed to leave behind 
its violent past to become a city where innovation and 
people’s dreams flourish, thanks to the collective work of 
its citizens, leaders, and public and private institutions.

However, our city’s present and future face enormous 
challenges. Unfortunately, the inequality, social conflict, 
insecurity, intolerance, inadequate land management, 
and new environmental challenges related to climate 
change endanger what we have worked so hard to 
achieve. 

Recognizing the importance of building on existing 
models and visions of the city, in coordination with 
100 Resilient Cities - Pioneered by The Rockefeller 
Foundation, and with the support of strategic partners, 
the Resilience Office has brought together the knowledge 
and experience of multiple strategic planning exercises 
and efforts carried out in the city in recent decades. 
These exercises have compiled the different voices of 
citizens committed to their city; experts passionate 
about awareness of the city’s problems; leaders who 
dream of a better future; and relentless workers who 
have made and continue to make Medellín a true 
expression of resilience.

Resilient Medellín resulted from a collaborative process 
and strategic thinking about the city’s future from a 
modern and innovative perspective. Collectively we have 
sought to understand the interrelations between the 

9

Medellín needs to identify the barriers that exist in 
the implementation of land management regulations, 
strengthen community participation in disaster risk 
management, and promote the revision, update and 
implementation of the building codes, primarily in 
schools, health centers and housing.

We also consider it a priority to promote accessibility, 
circulation, integration and coordination of the city’s 
public transportation systems to ensure the safe 
movement of people and goods over land.

Well-informed and Engaged Medellín

Through using data based decision-making practices,  
we can identify coordinated, holistic solutions to priority 
issues. It will be important to have a system or an 
agency that is responsible for data integration to allow 
the city to respond to problems more efficiently and with 
greater benefits for the population.

Safe and Peaceful Medellín

To achieve the dream of a safe and peaceful city, we 
will focus on preventing crime, creating strategies that 
permit access to justice, comprehensive care of victims, 
and remembrance. 

To transform the city and achieve a safe and peaceful 
Medellín, we also need to raise people’s awareness of 
what transpired  in the past to prevent the cycle of 
violence and insecurity repeating in the future. Knowing  
fully the history of what happened will help people 
understand how not to repeat the events that led to acts 
of violence.

Sustainable and
Risk-Prepared Medellín

We need to find the best way to mitigate economic losses 
and adverse effects caused by natural and human made 
disasters. We can achieve this through strategies that 
incorporate restrictions on land use control to address 
the threats and comply with city planning restrictions.

These goals form a plan of convergent actions that bring 
together a large number of projects (existing and new)  
The plan provides a shared understanding of the meaning 
and value of resilience, such as strengthening human and 
social ability to overcome adversity. Our city has developed 
the capacity to think, reinvent itself, and find original ways 
of living in the world. Medellín is a city that resists shocks, 
trauma, pain and loss, which has allowed it to find different 
ways of overcoming difficulties, disasters, tragedies and 
abuses. We are a valley, a mountain, a river, a hillside, a 
people. We are a resilient city.

Photography: Archivo Departamento Administrativo de Planeación 
-  Alcaldía de Medellín

Resilient MedellínResilient Medellín10

11

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

Resilient Medellín
A STRATEGY FOR OUR FUTURE

TA B L E   O F   C O N T E N T S

M E D E L L I N ' S   M A I N   R E SI L I E N C E   C H A L L E N G E S

B A C KG R O U N D   O F   M E D E L L Í N

P U R P O S E   A N D   I M P L E M E N TAT I O N   O F   T H E
R E SI L I E N C E   S T R AT E G Y 

G O A L S   A N D   A C T I O NS

E q u i t a b l e   M e d e l l í n

S a f e   a n d   P e a c e f u l   M e d e l l í n

S u s t a i n a b l e   a n d   R i s k - P r e p a r e d
M e d e l l í n

W e l l - i n f o r m e d   a n d   E n g a g e d
M e d e l l í n

 

A C KN OWL E D G E M E N T S

R E F E R E N C E S

M E D E L L Í N   I NS P I R E S   T H E   WO R L D

1 2

16

2 2

3 0

3 2

4 2

5 2

6 0

6 6

6 7

6 8

Resilient Medellín12
12

13
13

For most people, resilience is a new and foreign word that is even difficult to 
pronounce, which few of us associate with the history of the city, its institutions or 
its people. However, since the recognition by the Rockefeller Foundation  including 
Medellín as a member of 100 Resilient Cities, the word resilience is frequently used 
when talking about the city’s urban and social transformation. 

For Medellín, “resilience is part of the capacity that the city (as an urban, social and 
political system) and its inhabitants have developed to resist, overcome and learn 
from the causes and effects of national violence. This has been on-going for more 
than 60 years, particularly urban violence, which was most extreme in the nineties, 
intensified by the drug trafficking business, and since then, it has transformed into 
multiple expressions of violence.”

The city was chosen to join the 100 Resilient City program because of the innovative 
way it choses to identify the main risks to which its people and institutions are 
exposed. More than just an award or acknowledgment, it provides a great 
opportunity to recognize our problems and difficulties to help overcome them.

This was the first challenge that the recently created Medellín Resilience Office 
assumed  - to prepare a preliminary resilience assessment (PRA). The PRA facilitated 
the identification of the priority areas on which we should work together to promote 
the wellbeing and development of our city, and to improve its resilience capacity. It 
is a tool for strategic planning to reduce the impact of the shocks and stresses that 
afflict us the most.

This self-assessment exercise was carried out with the support of countless 
institutions and work groups, including the High Commissioner for Peace, 
Reconciliation and Life, the Victims’ Care Unit, Casa de la Memoria Museum, 
Proantioquia, Urbam, and Parque Explora.  As part of the PRA, priority stresses 
were identified and interdependencies between them were highlighted related to the 
phenomena of violence and conflict, such as: inequality; illegality; access to justice 
for citizens; access to good quality education, especially higher education, which 
particularly generates opportunities for the young population; and better land  and 
risk management.

This self-assessment exercise provided basic information to the Resilience Office to 
develop the resilience strategy, which we hope will allow us to nurture relationships 
with local and international strategic partners, and to better understand the city’s 
problems while proposing solutions for them.

Santiago Uribe Rocha
CHIEF RESILIENCE OFFICER, 
MEDELLÍN

Medellin’s
Main Resilience 
Challenges

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

Resilient MedellínResilient MedellínMedellin’s Resilience Vision
We envision a city where resilience is ubiquitous in 
our strategic planning processes as the driving force of 
urban transformation and social innovation, where we 
continue to promote equity and a culture of legality, 
improve urban land management, and reduce violence 
and extreme poverty. 

100 Resilient Cities - Pioneered by The 
Rockefeller Foundation defines resilience 
as “the capacity of individuals, communi-
ties and systems to withstand shocks while 
still maintaining their essential functions. 
Resilience also refers to the ability to reco-
ver quickly and effectively from catastro-
phes and the capability to endure greater 
stress.

Building resilience is about making people, 
communities and systems better prepared 
to withstand catastrophic events – both 
natural and manmade – and able to boun-
ce back more quickly and emerge stronger 
from these shocks and stresses. Humans 
are not born with resilience – we learn it, 
adapt it, and improve upon it. The same is 
true for organizations, systems, and socie-
ties.”

14

Medellin’s Main Resilience 
Challenges
We are a proud and profound expression of resilience. 
Medellín is a diverse, dynamic and expanding city 
that is constantly reinventing itself amidst social 
and economic difficulties. We have always embraced 
adversity as opportunity. Today, we continue to face 
a set of interrelated challenges of inequity, violence, 
illegality and extreme poverty that are exacerbated 
by our complex topography of steep slopes and narrow 
valleys.

Our biggest challenges are to overcome problems 
associated with inequity, such as widespread 
rural-to-urban migration, poverty, social exclusion, 
unemployment, limited access to higher education and 
economic opportunity, which have been intensified 
by a culture of illegality inherited from many years of 
violence.

The deterioration of public safety reinforced by  social 
marginalization, organized crime, illegality, and conflicts 
between citizens due to a culture of intolerance, 
destabilize and endanger the positive achievements 
implemented during Medellín’s transformation over the 
last decades. Our city must overcome these obstacles 
to continue our social development agenda and ensure 
respect for the human rights of all its citizens.

Continued threats related to the management of 
the land and natural resources reduce Medellín’s 
ability to operate and provide basic services to people, 
leading to health problems, loss of life, and damage 
to infrastructure and the environment, particularly 
affecting the most vulnerable population. Such threats 
are perpetuated by both natural and man-made 
shocks and stresses preventing us from achieving the 
sustainability goals.

Decision-making without reliable information and 
data limits the city’s ability to respond in a strategic 
and coordinated manner to shocks and stresses. 
Although Medellín has several information systems, 
it lacks a unified structure to identify vulnerabilities, 
lessening the ability to reduce risk and monitor response 
and recovery. We strive to inform our citizens with the 
most reliable information in seamlessly integrated, easily 
accessible sources for each citizen.

15

As part of the Resilient Medellín Challenge, we propose 
developing specific actions contained in the following 
goals:

Sustainable and Risk-Prepared 
Medellín

Equitable Medellín

Develop a more equitable and inclusive city and region 
with access to opportunities for all our citizens.

Safe and Peaceful Medellín

Strengthen a more peaceful and socially cohesive 
society by promoting crime and violence prevention 
strategies and a culture of legality.

Create a sustainable and risk-prepared city through 
greater management of land and infrastructure, 
sustainable transportation, environmental planning and 
adequate management of the natural resources and 
quality of life for its citizens.

Well-Informed and Engaged 
Medellín

Foster a well-informed city through improved access to 
information and data management that facilitates the 
analysis and transfer of knowledge for strategic planning 
of the city and effective governance.

Resilience Dividends
Through our goals and initiatives, we seek to generate multiple benefits through “resilience 
dividends”. “Resilience dividends” are about minimizing the effects of long-term shocks and 
stresses on individuals, families and communities, as well as maximizing the multiple benefits 
accrued from investment in resilient people, structures and systems within communities for 
the future. Throughout the Resilient Medellín Strategy, there will be co-benefits that spread 
across initiatives and goals to make a safer, stronger and more equitable Medellín. We hi-
ghlight the “resilience dividends” in our four flagship initiatives, one per resilience strategy 
goal, as examples of the multiplier effect that investing in resilience generates for cities.

“We are building more than a network – we are building a movement. Cities learning from 
cities. Sectors innovating with other sectors.” 
Dr. Judith Rodin
President, The Rockefeller Foundation

Photography: Archivo Departamento Administrativo de Planeación 
-  Alcaldía de Medellín

Resilient MedellínResilient MedellínFile design adapted Administrative Department of Planning - Mayor of Medellín

16

17

2.464.322
HABITANTES

1.304.563 

1.159.759

DANE 2015

WE ARE A CITY
WITH OUR OWN HISTORY

We h(cid:15)ve (cid:13)rown to(cid:13)ether in (cid:15) ch(cid:15)n(cid:13)in(cid:13) world.
We were (cid:15)ttr(cid:15)cted by its v(cid:15)lley (cid:15)nd its river,
but we popul(cid:15)ted its slopes.
Only now (cid:15)re we le(cid:15)rnin(cid:13) to live in them.
We (cid:15)re (cid:15) city th(cid:15)t (cid:15)w(cid:15)kened from the d(cid:15)rkness.
We (cid:15)re (cid:15) diverse, dyn(cid:15)mic (cid:15)nd (cid:13)rowin(cid:13) city.
We (cid:15)re (cid:15) city th(cid:15)t h(cid:15)s st(cid:15)rted to reco(cid:13)nize its problems, (cid:15)nd 
this h(cid:15)s led to us rethinkin(cid:13), discoverin(cid:13) ourselves,
(cid:15)nd settin(cid:13) new ch(cid:15)llen(cid:13)es.
We (cid:15)re (cid:15) city th(cid:15)t tr(cid:15)nsforms itself, th(cid:15)t const(cid:15)ntly
reinvents itself, (cid:15)nd th(cid:15)t ﬁ(cid:13)hts to overcome its (cid:13)re(cid:15)test 
di‚culties (cid:15)nd vulner(cid:15)bilities.
Inequ(cid:15)lity, violence, conﬂict, ille(cid:13)(cid:15)lity (cid:15)nd extreme poverty 
(cid:15)re our (cid:13)re(cid:15)test ch(cid:15)llen(cid:13)es to overcome.
We must work within (cid:15) network to desi(cid:13)n str(cid:15)te(cid:13)ies (cid:15)nd ﬁnd 
solutions to pro(cid:13)ress (cid:15)nd (cid:15)ct e‚ciently, (cid:15)nd consider life (cid:15)s 
h(cid:15)vin(cid:13) supreme v(cid:15)lue.
We (cid:15)re (cid:15) city c(cid:15)lled Medellín.
A profound expression of resilience.

Resilient MedellínResilient MedellínBackground of18

MEDELLÍN IN THE WORLD

COLOMBIA

Year founded    
Population    
 
Urban population 
Rural population  
 
Victims   
 
 
  
  
 
 

1810
48’747.632* 
37’333.495* 
11’414.137*
More than 8   
million registered  
by May 2016

MEDELLÍN

Year founded    
Population    
 
Urban population 
Rural population  
 
Victims   

1616
2’486.723* 
2’457.680*
29’043*
575.000** 

*Forecast of the National Department 
of Statistics (Departamento Nacional 
de Estadística, DANE) as at 2016
** Recorded as at December 2015 in 
the Victims' Unit

MAIN LANDSLIDE DISASTERS
LANDSLIDES WITH MORE THAN TEN DEATHS

Design adapted from the book
RE HABITAR LA LADERA SHIFTING GROUND
A study conducted by the Urban and Environmental Studies Center (Urbam), Universidad EAFIT
and Harvard Graduate School of Design Social Agency Lab

19

La Gabriela
85 muertos
Poblado
12 muertos
El Socorro
28 muertos

Villatina
500 muertos
Santa Maria
10 muertos
San Antonio
18 muertos

Santo Domingo
70 muertos
La Managuala
13 muertos

Media Luna
100 muertos

Rosellón
18 muertos

Dic. 05, 2010
2010
Nov. 16, 2008
May. 31, 2008

2000

1990
Sept. 27, 1987

Nov. 23, 1984

Oct. 20, 1980
1980

Sept. 29, 1974
Jun. 25, 1973

1970

1960

Jul. 12, 1954

1950

1940

1930
Jun. 18, 1927

1920

COLOMBIA  MEDELLÍN

0

Deaths Caused by Landslide 

12 KM

 

Very High Hazard
High Hazard
  Medium Hazard
 Low Hazard
Waterways

The historic record of disasters in the Aburrá 
Valley shows that 10 landslides have taken 854 
lives.  The four most deadly, with a total of 750 
victims occurred on slopes of serpentine dunites.

STATE OF THREAT IN VALLE DE ABURRÁ

1.74 %
5.03 %
9.37 %
38.6 %
35.16 %
10.1 %

6

 

3.96 %
6.82 %
9.96 %
29.64 %
37.03 %
12.62 %

NSE

5

NSE

4

NSE

3

NSE

2

NSE

1

NSE

854 people have died in the 
Aburrá Valley as a result of 
landslides in the last 80 years

0

12 KM

Landslide
Very High Risk of Mass Movement
High Risk of Mass Movement 
Floodplains and Flash Flood Zones 
  2.5 - 2.9 m/year Precipitation
2.1 - 2.5 m/year Precipitation

Socioeconomic Level (SEL) Pyramid

Medellín's population is comprised of
approximately 2,500,000 people 

out of which, approximately
600,000 are victims.

“We (cid:27)ren't loc(cid:27)ted in (cid:27) very (cid:15)eostr(cid:27)te(cid:15)ic pl(cid:27)ce. We do not h(cid:27)ve (cid:27)ccess to ports (cid:27)nd we do not h(cid:27)ve e(cid:27)sy (cid:27)ccess to the world economy. We h(cid:27)ve (cid:27) very dem(cid:27)ndin(cid:15) (cid:27)nd very 
complic(cid:27)ted (cid:15)eo(cid:15)r(cid:27)phy, which me(cid:27)ns th(cid:27)t we live (cid:27)midst ch(cid:27)llen(cid:15)es, but this h(cid:27)s led us to be (cid:27) society th(cid:27)t h(cid:27)s the c(cid:27)p(cid:27)city to develop its potenti(cid:27)l in order to tr(cid:27)nsform 
its di(cid:4)culties into opportunities." 

Jor(cid:28)e Pérez J(cid:22)r(cid:22)millo – Former Pl(cid:22)nnin(cid:28) Secret(cid:22)ry of Medellín.

Resilient MedellínResilient Medellín20

MEDELLÍN OVER TIME

Evolution of the Homicide Rate in Medellín

21

380,6 

1995

380,6 

352,5 

329,8 

Strategic Plan for 
Medellín and its 

352,5 

Metropolitan Area 

329,8 

311 

(1995-2015)

311 

248 

1991

248 
Presidential Advisory 
Office for Medellín is 

213 

created
213 

263 

263 

225,9 

199,5 

170 

170 

135 

154 

135 

154 

2000

Armed struggle for 
control of the land

173,9 

183,6 
166,6 

183,6 

173,9 

159,6 

166,6 

162,7 

159,6 

155 

100 

85 

70 

80 

72 

70 

92 

85 

80 

92 

72 

Functioning of
Medellin Metro

98,2 

98,2 

94,4 

50 

0 
82 

80 

83 

81 

84 

82 

85 

83 

86 

84 

87 

85 

88 

86 

89 

87 

90 

88 

91 

89 

92 

90 

93 

91 

94 

92 

95 

93 

96 

94 

97 

95 

99 

00 

98 

01 

99 

02 

00  01 

03 

04 

57,3 

57,3 

45,6 

35,3 

35,9 

34 

02 

05 

03 

06 

04 

07 

05 

08 

Evolución

de la tasa de homicidios

en Medellín 

2013

Selection to 100RC

Evolución

de la tasa de homicidios

en Medellín 

2011

Decrease in

poverty

from 7.9% to 4.0%

94,4 

86,3 

69,6 

69,6 

2015

Creation of the Land 
Management Plan (POT

for the Spanish
acronym) for the

next 15 years

52,3 

38,3 

52,3 

38,3 

27 

27 

86,3 

45,6 

35,3  35,9 

34 

06  07 

09 

10 

08 
11 

09 
12 

10 

13 

11 

14 

12 

13 

14 

400 

350 

300 

250 

200 

150 

400 

350 

300 

250 

200 

150 

100 

50 

Año

80 

81 

1616

Medellín
is founded

1920    

   91.450aprox.

1950    

 270.534aprox.

1980        1.337.406aprox.

1990      2.368.282aprox.

2016

Launch of the Medellín 

Resilience Strategy

Gini Coefficient for Medellín and Medellín Metropolitan Area / 2008-2015

 
i

i

n
G

0,56

0,54

0,52

0,50

0,48

0,46

0,44

0,550 

0,533 

0,543 

0,535 

0,538 

0,507 

0,500 

0,506 

0,524 

0,526 

0,504 

0,489 

2008 2009 2010 2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Source: National Administrative Department of Statistics (Departamento Nacional de Estadística, DANE) based on the Gran Encuesta 

Integrada de Hogares (Great Integrated Home Survey, GEIH).

Note: The Metropolitan Area includes the municipalities of Barbosa, Bello, Caldas, Copacabana, Itagüí, La Estrella, Sabaneta and Medellín.

Medellín AM
Medellín
Lineal (Medellín AM)

Resilient MedellínResilient Medellín22

23

T

     he city has contemplated its resilience capacity in order to improve its citizens’ quality of life, reduce threats, create 
a safer place for living, and improve its economic development.

The Resilience Strategy is focused on a group of flagship initiatives that must be collectively developed by the city’s 
different organizations to mitigate the impact of the threats and to build a sustainable and resilient city. 

To create this document, the knowledge, ideas and experience of national and international, public, private and civil 
organizations were collected, gradually establishing actions for Medellín to improve its resilience capacity.

“Medellín has undergone loss of people and of 
confidence in the State, and it has experienced  
situations where many young people end up 
involved in all kinds of illegal activities. I think 
that resilience has a very important role, as 
it is necessary to find strength in the people 
of Medellín that allows us to deal with painful 

transitions, and understand that this is a city 
of opportunities; one that we have to build 
together. It is a city that is capable and that 
has already rebuilt itself several times from the 
ashes.  I think that there is a resilience capacity 
in Medellín, in its people, and in its authorities.”

Luz Patricia Correa Madrigal
DIRECTOR OF THE MUNICIPAL VICTIMS’ CARE UNIT OF MEDELLÍN CITY HALL.

Furthermore, the chronic stresses and critical shocks of the city were researched through the review of documents, 
workshops,  interviews  and  meetings  with  diverse  organizations  and  people  interested  in  knowing  how  the  city  has 
overcome its adversities, and the lessons that it has learned to create new strategies and empower existing ones, 
which gives the city greater sustainability.
 
The actions described below in each goal are the result of the arduous work and effort of public and private institutions, 
and of the many people who dream of a resilient Medellín.

Purpose and 
Implementation 
of the Resilience 
Strategy

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

Resilient MedellínResilient Medellín24

DESIGN AND CREATION OF            THE RESILIENCE STRATEGY

25

Creation of the
Resilience Committee

· Mayor of Medellín
· Government Secretary
· Private Secretary of the Mayor
· President of Medellín Council
· City Councilman
· Administrative Department of Disaster Risk Management
(Departamento Administrativo de Gestíon de Riesgo de
Desastres, DAGRD)
· Agencia de Cooperación e Inversión (ACI)
· Casa de la Memoria Museum
· Proantioquia
· Urbam – Universidad EAFIT
· Beatriz Restrepo Gallego, expert philosopher of the city
· Medellín Metro
· Municipal Victims' Care and Reparations Unit
· Parque Explora: Science and Technology Museum
· Sustainability Department of Grupo Bancolombia

Selection to 100RC

2013
October

2014
May

 
Identiﬁcation of goals 
and ﬂagship initiatives

· Disaster Risk 
Management/Land 
Management
· Data Integration and 
Management
· Sustainable Mobility
· Coexistence and Culture of 
Peace
 · Education, Culture, 
Recreation and Sport
recreación y deporte

MEDELLÍN

Preliminary Resilience Assessment (PRA). 

2014
July
December

Launch of the
Communications
Strategy of the
Resilience O(cid:7)ce

MEDELLÍN RESILIENTE

PIONEERED BY THE ROCKEFELLER FOUNDATION

2015
August

Launch of the Medellín
Resilience Strategy

Design
of the strategy 

2015
October
December

Incorporation
of the resilience topic
into the development
plan as one of the lines
of emphasis.

2016
March
May

2016
July

2014
April

2014
June

2015
January
July

2015
September

2016
January
February

Rio de Janeiro and Porto Alegre exchange

Presentation
of the Resilience Strategy
to the Mayor

Opening of the Medellín 
Resilience O(cid:7)ce and 
appointment of the Chief 
Resilience O(cid:7)cer

Incorporation of strategic 
partners of the city

Identiﬁcation of ﬂagship initiatives 

EQUITABLE MEDELLÍN
· Colaboratorios
· Popular Sport Schools (Escuelas Populares del 
Deporte, EPD)
· Expanded Territory
· STEAM
· Teacher Innovation Center (Centro de 
Innovación de los Maestros, MOVA)

SAFE AND PEACEFUL MEDELLÍN
· Guarantees of non-repetition
· Safe cities for women
· Strengthening of the Victims' Unit
· “Resilient Women” - Talented Young Women

SUSTAINABLE AND
RISK-PREPARED MEDELLÍN
· Integrated Transportation System of Valle de 
Aburrá (SITVA for the Spanish acronym) study
· SITVA Qualitative Research Laboratory
· Resettlement of the hillside - Urbam
· UN Habitat documentaries - Discovery
· Risk transfer
· Urban planning think tank
· Local risk management committees
· Early-Warning System (SIATA for the Spanish 
acronym) - Explora

WELL-INFORMED AND ENGAGED MEDELLÍN
· Agency for the management and integration of 
information

2016
2019

Medellín
Development Plan

Resilient MedellínResilient Medellín26

27

100 Resilient Cities - Pioneered by The Rockefeller Foundation, is dedicated to helping cities around the 
world become more resilient to the physical, social, and economic challenges that are a growing part of the 21st 
century.  100RC supports the adoption and incorporation of a view of resilience that includes not only the shocks 
-earthquakes, floods, outbreaks of disease, etc.- but also the stresses that weaken a city’s structure on a day to day or 
cyclical basis. Examples of these stresses include high unemployment; an overtaxed or inefficient public transportation 
system; endemic violence; or chronic food and water shortages. By addressing both the shocks and the stresses, a city 
becomes more able to respond to adverse events, and is overall better able to deliver basic functions in both good 
times and bad, to all populations.

[…] 100RC aims not only to help individual cities become more resilient, but will facilitate the building of a global 
practice of resilience...

(About 100 Resilient Cities)

Medellín was one of the first cities to be selected to form part of the 100 Resilient Cities Challenge. Unlike others 
that focused their attention on the capacity to overcome natural disasters or the value of disaster risk management, 
Medellín focused its proposal on assuming resilience, such as:

“the capacity that the city (as an urban, social and political system) and its inhabitants have developed 
to resist, overcome and learn from the causes and effects of national violence. This has been experienced 
for more than 60 years, particularly urban violence, which underwent its most difficult times in the 
nineties, intensified by the drug trafficking business, and since then, it has transformed into multiple 
expressions of violence.”

(City’s application nomination form)

One  of  our  main  guiding  principles  for  the  design 
of  the  Resilience  Strategy  has  been  the  Resilience 
Framework  developed  by  Arup  with  the  support  of 
the  Rockefeller  Foundation  for  the  100  Resilient 
Cities  Challenge.    With  this  tool,  we  identified  the 
most  critical  areas  of  Medellín,  where  actions  need 
to be implemented to strengthen the city’s resilience 
capacity.

In the process of identifying resilient actions, the resilience qualities also designed by ARUP were taken into account, 
which allow cities as urban systems to support, respond to and adapt to the shocks and stresses as quickly as possible. 
Therefore, projects were sought that were:

The capacity to learn from the past 
and act in times of crisis.

Are qualities that help to conceive systems and assets that 
can withstand shocks and stresses, as well as the willingness 
to use alternative strategies to facilitate rapid recovery.

Relate to the processes of good 
governance and effective leadership that 
ensure investments and actions are 
appropriate, address the needs of the 
most vulnerable, and collectively create a 
resilient city – for everyone.

Photography files 100RC

Resilient MedellínResilient Medellín REFLECTIVEIndividuals and institutions that are reﬂective use past experience to inform future decisions, and will modify standards and behaviors accordingly. People and institutions are able to recognize alternative ways to use resources at times of crisis in order to meet their needs or achieve their goals. RESOURCEFULROBUSTWell-conceived, constructed and managed systems. This includesmaking the provision to ensure that failure is predictable, safe,and notdisproportionate to the cause.EXTRA CAPACITYRefers to spare capacity intentionally created to accommodate disruption due to extreme pressures, surges in demand or an external event. It includes diversity where there are multiple ways to achieve a given need.FLEXIBILITYRefers to the willingness and capacity to adopt alternative strategiesin response to changing circumstances or sudden crises. Systems can be made more ﬂexible by introducing new technologies or knowledge,including recognizing traditional practices.INCLUSIVEPrioritizes the need for broad consultationand ‘manyseats at the table’ to create a sense of shared ownership in decision-making.INTEGRATED Processes that bring together a wide range of di(cid:14)erent systems and institutions, and that can catalyze additional beneﬁts as resources are shared, and participants are enabled to work together to achieve greater aims.28

29

By prioritizing the initiatives using the resilience qualities, the city will be able to identify strategies that intervene in 
multiple shocks and stresses in a more focused manner, preventing the development of other crises and intervening in 
existent ones.  This improves the city’s recovery capacity, saves financial and human resources, and contributes to the 
construction of a more equitable and sustainable city.

“Resilience is Medellín. I believe that we are a very beautiful and profound expression of resilience, because 
I understand that resilience is what makes a society able to confront its difficulties and its challenges, 
its infeasibilities and its conflicts, its insecurities, and in general, all its difficult situations with collective 
capacity and energy to transform this into a strength.  This is a city that has lived though so many 
disgraces and so many pains, but that every day dreams of a better world and works to overcome them. 
This land is ours and we don’t doubt for a second that it is our responsibility to make it better. ”

Jorge Pérez Jaramillo – FORMER PLANNING SECRETARY OF MEDELLÍN.

Platform Partners

By being part of The 100 Resilient Cities - Pioneered by The Rockefeller Foundation, the city has access to an innovative platform 
of partners that offers a series of services to support the Resilience Strategy in its development and implementation. 

The platform partners  are from the private and public sectors and from civil society, and they offer tools in areas such as 
financial innovation, technology, infrastructure, land use, and social and community resilience.

Together with the city’s public and private institutions, the Medellín Resilience Office is working with some platform partners on 
specific actions to be developed as part of the actions that are described as part of each goal of the Resilience Strategy.  The 
platform partners we are working with are:

We are also exploring the possibility of working with other strategic platform partners that are also part of the 100 Resilient 
Cities Program, such as:

FOTO

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

COORDINATION OF THE RESILIENCE OFFICE
WITH THE CITY’S DEVELOPMENT PLAN

In its 2016-2019 Development Plan, Medellín has established the cross-cutting resilience approach in its seven guiding principals 
with which it intends to recover citizen coexistence and safety; develop a new model of social equality; implement high quality 
educational programs for development and competitiveness; work for sustainable mobility; comprehensively intervene in the land 
and recover the center as an area for living; implement environmental conservation programs; and work on citizen culture.
 
Under the leadership of the Resilience Office and with the support of the 100 Resilient Cities Program, the city defined and 
assumed resilience in its 2016-2019 Development Plan as the “capacity for strategic planning that permits the identification 
and design of comprehensive solutions from multiple aspects, such as security and coexistence, social cohesion, citizen culture, 
sustainable mobility, education, risk management, land management, information management, and sustainability”. This assumes 
the challenge to increase the capacity of the city to overcome difficulties and maintain the actions directed at improving the 
environment and people’s quality of life.

The Medellín Resilience Office is one of the main offices in the city responsible for embedding resilience in for the programs and 
projects of the Development Plan.   

The role of the Chief Resilience Officer and his team of professionals is to work with public, private and social organizations 
to identify the city’s vulnerabilities, establish proposals that permit the reduction of risks, and monitor their delivery with 
coordinated, shared and reliable information.  The office has established itself as having the capacity for coordination, 
assistance, follow-up and assessment of the selected projects, actions, plans and programs of institutions and civil society 
to empower Medellín’s capacity for strategic planning.  It helps the city to generate other social innovations and urban 
transformations, strengthening equality, a culture of legality, land management, reduction of violence and extreme poverty.

Resilient MedellínResilient Medellín30

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

31

GOAL 2

EQUITABLE
MEDELLÍN

SAFE AND
PEACEFUL
MEDELLÍN

GOAL 1

A number of the these projects have already been underway 
in the city for some time, while others were designed with 
the support of the Medellin Resilience Office to form part of 
the strategy.

GOAL 4

SUSTAINABLE
AND RISK-
PREPARED
MEDELLÍN

WELL-
INFORMED
AND ENGAGED
MEDELLÍN

GOAL 3

Resilient MedellínResilient MedellínGOAL 1

33

There  are  many  definitions  of  equality, 
perhaps the most successful one is that by Amartya Sen, 
who links equality with the opportunities that allow human 
beings to develop their potential and access the benefits of 
development in order to achieve a dignified life. It is known 
that worldwide, inequality is currently the greatest political 
problem (it generates instability and weakens the State’s 
institutions), social problem (a society in which there are 
great economic, political and social differences is divided, 
and frequently in conflict), and moral problem (as inequality 
obstructs visibility and the exercise of human dignity based 
on the moral subject).  And it is not just a problem of poor 
nations; rich nations have also seen inequality grow given 
the enormous concentration of wealth in the hands of few 
people.
  
Inequality can be seen in the exclusion of large sectors of 
the  population  because  of  their  lack  of  capacity  to  play 
a productive role in society.  Exclusive societies, meaning 
those that do not promote or permit the participation of 
their whole population in political circles (full participation 
in  citizens’  rights),  economic  life  (production,  access  to 
and enjoyment of the available wealth) and social circles 
(access to services that make good quality of life possible: 
education,  health,  housing,  recreation,  and  art),  are 
unequal societies in which the shortages and inequalities 
not only have material consequences, but also, and perhaps 
most importantly, psychological consequences (insecurity, 
pessimism and fear) and moral problems (distrust, despair 
and humiliation). 

In  light  of  this  very  negative  outlook  for  human  dignity, 
and  the  suffering  as  a  result  of  exclusion  and  inequality, 
the possibility is considered of human beings overcoming 
their  circumstances  and  conditions,  to  readjust  their 
psyche  and  recover  their  moral  strength.  This  is  thanks 
to  resilience,  which  is  a  condition  of  human  beings  that 
helps  them  to  overcome  their  limitations  and  obstacles 

produced by social disorder and face their psychological, 
economic,  social  and  moral  situation  with  possibilities  of 
success.    Children  and  young  people  have  the  greatest 
resilience  capacity,  but  all  human  beings  can  awaken  it 
and make it into an effective medium to progress toward 
their development if they receive support.  It is practically 
impossible to escape from a situation of severe marginality 
if there are not certain conditions that facilitate it.  This is 
very important.

Contributing  to  the  recovery  process  of  human  beings 
subjected  to  conditions  of  extreme  vulnerability  and 
suffering  is  not  an  easy  task  and  it  must  be  overcome 
with a dual approach. Materially, because in the event of 
extreme shortages, there is a need to resort to benefits, 
and  psychologically,  because  the  lost  trust  needs  to  be 
reignited in others, and above all, in oneself.   Here is where 
practices of equality arise as a first breath that awakens 
resilience,  and  shows  whether  there  are  the  people  and 
resources  to  achieve  it  with,  whether  it  is  possible  to 
progress on their own feet and whether rehumanization of 
their existence is achievable.

In response to complete or almost complete deprivation, 
many  human  beings  have  the  wonderful  capacity  to 
reinvent themselves, recompose themselves, and even to 
survive, and they can do it all by themselves.  The capacity 
is  there,  but  it  needs  to  be  awakened  and  supported.  
Equality and one of its most important categories, positive 
discrimination,  is  the  magic  word  that  will  awaken  it. 
Affection  and  assistance  (which  are  determining  factors 
in  children  to  trigger  these  processes),  and  material 
support are necessary.  The supported resilience of social, 
political and moral practices of equality will allow a large 
number of human beings that are currently marginalized 
to  become  the  authors  of  their  own  inclusion  in  society, 
which they currently see from the margins of poverty and 
abandonment.

EQUITABLE
MEDELLÍN

Develop a more equitable and 
inclusive city and region with access 
to opportunities for all our citizens.

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

Beatriz Restrepo
Philosopher - Expert on the City and Member
of the Resilience Committee

GOAL 1  /  EquitAbLE MEdELLín34

35

Resilience Dividends
In line with the “resilience dividend”, this flagship 
initiative highlights the potential for co-benefits to result 
from its main objective of strengthening the education 
of young people in science, technology and innovation. 
By implementing this flagship initiative, we will 
support additional co-benefits in areas such as: social 
cohesion, economic sustenance, disaster preparation 
and prevention, empowerment of a wide range of 
stakeholders, promotion of leadership and effective 
management. Specifically in the initiatives: Popular 
Sport Schools (EPD); Expanded Territory; Teacher 
Innovation Center (MOVA); Coordinated Life Units 
(Unidades de Vida Articulada, UVA); Peace University 
-University Citadel of Peace and Non-Violence- 
(Universidad de la Paz -Ciudadela Universitaria de la 
Paz y la No Violencia-); Community Sport (Sport and 
Coexistence Program of Medellín Sports and Recreation 
Institute); Improving Healthy Physical Activity; School 
Research through the STEAM (science, technology, 
engineering, arts and math) Methodology; and Science, 
Technology and Innovation Fairs.

Acute shocks and chronic stresses addressed:
• Inequality and lack of opportunities
• Crime and insecurity
• Poor quality education

Indicators
• Promote cohesive and committed communities: 
Community participation, and connectivity.
• Empower a wide range of stakeholders: Transfer of 
knowledge and education.
• Children, young people and adults with access to 
research and development groups.
• Children, young people and adults who increase their 
social participation.
• Build creation laboratories in the city.
• Provide equipment for research and development.

Monitoring activities of the Resilience Office 
• Visits to workshops (one per month)
• Focus groups with the professional team in charge of the 
project (one per month)

Photography: Meeting “Colaboratorio”. Public Workshop of 
experimentation “Parque Explora” and the “Alcaldía de Medellín”, a 
community project open, under construction, scheduled to open in 
September 2016.

Over the last two years, the Medellín Resilience Office reviewed and studied different initiatives and pro-
jects that were being implemented in the city, and other new ones that had been proposed. After this 
review process, we consider that the actions proposed to achieve an equitable Medellín are the ones 
described below.

Flagship Initiative

1.A Colaboratorios - Public
Experimentation Workshop

A Colaboratorio is a citizens’ meeting place to “hang 
out”, share knowledge and learn, which is coordinated in 
four topic areas: Be, Do, Tell and Think.

It is a project open to all in the city but focused on young 
people, it is equipped with tools and areas for research, 
experimentation and co-creation in different fields of 
knowledge such as robotics, astronomy and biodiversity.

In the future, it will be designed to be a physical 
place in a building with a friendly, flexible and diverse 
environment.

Overall objective
Foster the development of educational activities to gain 
young people’s interest, starting with their appropriation 
of science, technology and innovation.

Specific objectives 
• Generate a space that facilitates the acceptance of 
young people’s knowledge.
• Strengthen young people’s creative skills.
• Empower the exchange of knowledge and social 
innovation.

Relation to the development plan
This project intends to reduce inequality in the 
population. It has been implemented in the city through 
a public-private partnership.

Photography: Meeting “Colaboratorio”. Public Workshop of 
experimentation “Parque Explora” and the “Alcaldía de Medellín”, a 
community project open, under construction, scheduled to open in 
September 2016.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Parque Explora (Science and Technology Museum)

Platform partners
To strengthen this initiative of the Medellín 
Resilience Office together with the city’s public and 
private institutions, we are working in partnership 
with: Fundación Mario Santo Domingo (FMSD), and 
Pacífico.
We are also exploring the possibility of working with 
Save the Children.

Term
Short-term - one year.

GOAL 1  /  EquitAbLE MEdELLínGOAL 1  /  EquitAbLE MEdELLín36

Other initiatives that support the goal.
1.B Popular Sport Schools (EPD)

This is a program for providing citizens with skills through 
sport, aiming to contribute to all-round development, 
strengthening socialization and learning of principles 
such as peaceful coexistence, citizen culture and non-
violence through sport.

This program has been in place since 2001, and is aimed 
at men and women aged between 6 and 50 years, each 
age group completing a specific process.

Objective
Promote sports through training processes that also 
contribute to social development and citizen coexistence 
in Medellín’s children, young people and adults.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “We Believe in Citizen Culture” 
dimension, of the “Medellín Culture” challenge, and 
of the “Culture of Care for a Healthy Medellín” and 
“D Culture” programs, as part of the proposal of 
the projects: “Improving Healthy Physical Activity”, 
“Implementing Training, Integration and Citizen 
Knowledge Processes through Physical Activity, 
Recreation and Sport”, and “Improving Community Sport 
for Social Integration”.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Medellín Sports and Recreation Institute (Instituto 
de Deportes y Recreación de Medellín, INDER).

Platform partners
Together with the city’s public and private 
institutions, the Medellín Resilience Office is working 
on the identification of strategic platform partners 
that are part of the 100 Resilient Cities Program to 
strengthen this initiative.

Term
Long term - four years or more.

1.C Expanded Territory

1.D Teacher Innovation Center (MOVA)

1.E Coordinated Life Units (UVA)

37

Expanded Territory provides workshops focused on 
generating other ways of living, as an opportunity for 
continuous learning.  The methodology is based on 
collaborative work, on do it yourself (DIY) and do it 
with others (DIWO) ideas, on learning by doing, and on 
learning with others, decentralizing the formal concept 
of a school. This project has in place for two years.

Objective
Encourage young people meeting for “maker” type 
educational practices to develop soft skills through the 
construction of (innovative and social) projects and 
prototypes borne out of community interests.

Relation to the development plan
This action is designed to strengthen the city’s 
educational processes.  It has previously been 
implemented through a public-private partnership.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Parque Explora (Science and Technology Museum)

Platform partners
Together with the city’s public and private 
institutions, the Medellín Resilience Office is working 
on the identification of strategic platform partners 
that are part of the 100 Resilient Cities Program to 
strengthen this initiative.

Term
Short term - one year.

MOVA is a physical space for the meeting, training, 
and professional and personal growth of the city’s 
teachers. It is a place to foster, promote and integrate 
the teachers’ dimensions of being, knowing and creating, 
generating diverse and contextualized educational 
practices.

This place has training classrooms, dance laboratories, 
a reading area, a kitchen, and rooms for audiovisual 
creation, research, life sciences, DIY and creative arts. 
There, the teachers strengthen their personal, vocational 
and professional skills through human development, 
situated learning, methodological reflection and 
educational research. Their three principles are: exist to 
talk, know how to create and create to innovate.

Objective
Recognize the city’s teachers as people with educational 
knowledge, which involves thinking beyond the 
classroom.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “Good Quality Education for 
Development and Competitiveness” dimension, of the 
“Medellín, Path to Excellency and Quality” challenge, 
and of the “Teachers, People of Knowledge” program, as 
part of the proposal for the project: “Teacher Training 
System”.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Education Office of Medellín City Hall, Universidad 
Pontificia Bolivariana (UPB), and Parque Explora 
(Science and Technology Museum).

Platform partners
To strengthen this initiative of the Medellín 
Resilience Office together with the city’s public 
and private institutions, we are exploring the 
possibility of working with the UC Berkeley Center 
for Catastrophic Risk Management (CCRM).

Term
Long term - four years or more.

 

These are physical areas developed according to the 
principle: “everything under the sky is an opportunity 
to learn”. They are being built in collaboration between 
government institutions and local residents. The UVAs 
are designed with  community input, and are converted 
into physical structures by architects. There are two 
types: Type A,  which converts a water tank into public 
place for the community with centers for recreation, 
education and culture.

Type B leverages the topography and optimizes an 
existing sport area for use by the public. Facilities 
include a multipurpose coliseum, (for sport and culture), 
covered and open-air gymnasiums, a playroom, a 
synthetic soccer field, technology rooms, and other 
sports and culture areas that were prioritized by the 
community according to its needs and interests (dance 
studios, music recording studios, cinemas, television 
control room, etc.).

Objective
Optimize the use of already existing areas to coordinate 
culture, innovation, sport, coexistence and social 
transformation.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “Comprehensive Intervention 
in the Land and Recovery of the Center” dimension, of 
the “Suitable Habitat for Medellín” challenge, and of 
the “Comprehensive Improvement of Neighborhoods” 
program, as part of the proposal of the project: 
“Construction, Improvement and Maintenance of Sports 
and Recreational Facilities”.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Medellín Sports and Recreation Institute (Instituto 
de Deportes y Recreación de Medellín, INDER) and 
Empresas Públicas de Medellín (EPM).

Platform partners
Together with the city’s public and private 
institutions, the Medellín Resilience Office is working 
on the identification of strategic platform partners 
that are part of the 100 Resilient Cities Program to 
strengthen this initiative. 

Term
Long term - four years or more.

GOAL 1  /  EquitAbLE MEdELLínGOAL 1  /  EquitAbLE MEdELLínParties responsible for its implementation
Medellín Sports and Recreation Institute (Instituto 
de Deportes y Recreación de Medellín, INDER).

Platform partners
To strengthen this initiative of the Medellín 
Resilience Office together with the city’s public and 
private institutions, we are exploring the possibility 
of working with Save the Children.

Term
Long term - four years or more.

1.H Improving Healthy Physical Activity

This is a city investment to promote healthy lifestyles 
through sport, applying the recommendations of the 
World Health Organization (WHO).  It also incorporates 
additional activities and a teaching component for the 
population ranging from children to senior citizens.

Objective
Promote physical activity and the adoption of healthy 
lifestyles through novel and attractive alternatives.

39

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “We Believe in Citizen Culture” 
dimension, of the “Medellín Culture” challenge, and of 
the “Culture of Care for a Healthy Medellín” program, as 
part of the proposal of the project: “Improving Healthy 
Physical Activity”.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Medellín Sports and Recreation Institute (Instituto 
de Deportes y Recreación de Medellín, INDER).

Platform partners
Together with the city’s public and private 
institutions, the Medellín Resilience Office is working 
on the identification of strategic platform partners 
that are part of the 100 Resilient Cities Program to 
strengthen this initiative.

Term
Medium term - from two to three years.

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

38

1.F  Peace University (University Citadel 
of Peace and Non-Violence)

1.G Community Sport -  Sport and
Coexistence Program of INDER

The project will consist of a 55,000 square meter new 
university building within in the old women’s prison: El 
Buen Pastor.  The University Citadel will provide 20,000 
new places for students for the educational institutions: 
Instituto Tecnológico Metropolitano (ITM), Pascual 
Bravo and Colegio Mayor de Antioquia. 

This educational project is part of the largest and 
most significant social investment being made by 
the municipality of Medellín, as a means of social 
transformation, where different organizations can 
collaborate to create a new culture for citizens.

The city plans to start construction in 2016.

Objective
Create places for training and academic, cultural, 
sport and social meetings, for citizens in general, and 
particularly for the areas of greatest need, Comuna 12 
La América and Comuna 13 San Javier.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “Good Quality Education for 
Development and Competitiveness” dimension, of the 
“Medellín, Path to Excellency and Quality” challenge, 
and of the “Infrastructure for Good Quality Education” 
program, as part of the proposal of the projects: 
“Infrastructure and Equipment for Scientific Research 
and Technological Development in Higher Education” 
and “Sustainable University Cities”.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Medellín Agency for Higher Education (SAPIENCIA), 
and the Education Office of Medellín City Hall.

Platform partners
To strengthen this initiative of the Medellín 
Resilience Office together with the city’s public 
and private institutions, we are exploring the 
possibility of working with the UC Berkeley Center 
for Catastrophic Risk Management (CCRM).

Term
Medium term - from two to three years.

This is a social project that develops recreational/
educational workshops with children, adolescents, 
young people, parents and teachers in vulnerable 
socioeconomic contexts in educational institutions with 
violence-related problems. Sport is used as a reflective 
lens through which to work on aspects such as: life 
plans, social skills, respect for differences and identity, 
emotional control, winning and losing, assuming victories 
and defeats, cooperation, assertive communication, 
rules, regulations and respect.

Since 2015, as part of a memorandum of understanding 
signed with the organization Fight for Peace 
International, the Sport and Coexistence Program 
started a special project with juvenile delinquents 
imprisoned in La Pola (prison for minors), where 
boxing is used together with educational and personal 
development programs, empowering the all-round 
development of these young people and generating 
positive changes in their behavior and life goals.

Objective
Foster areas for all-round development through 
sports to raise the awareness of the people involved, 
such as  athletes, trainers, journalists, guardians and 
other spectators in Medellín to contribute directly and 
indirectly to peaceful coexistence and forming a new 
citizen culture.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “We Believe in Citizen Culture” 
dimension, of the “Medellín Culture” challenge, and 
of the “Culture of Care for a Healthy Medellín” and 
“D Culture” programs, as part of the proposal of 
the projects: “Improving Healthy Physical Activity”, 
“Implementing Training, Integration and Citizen 
Knowledge Processes through Physical Activity, 
Recreation and Sport”, and “Improving Community Sport 
for Social Integration”.

GOAL 1  /  EquitAbLE MEdELLínGOAL 1  /  EquitAbLE MEdELLín40

41

1.I School Research through the STEAM
(Science, Technology, Engineering, Art
and Math) Methodology

This methodology is an interdisciplinary educational 
process based on science, technology, engineering, 
art and math, in which theory, action and real world 
applications  are combined to create citizens for the 21st 
Century and its knowledge economy., all coordinated 
in a fabric of skills, abilities and values of 21st  Century 
society and economies of knowledge. The STEAM 
experiments should be understood as meeting places 
for the empirical search for new forms of teaching  –  
learning based on the coordination of theory + action + 
real context, with interdisciplinary teaching content in 
collaborative work and considering  a select set of skills 
and abilities for creating of citizens of the 21st century 
and knowledge economies.

A pilot project has already been carried out with 
teachers of a public school in the city.

Objective
Design, develop and execute pilot projects on new 
educational and innovative methods  that can be 
transferred to Medellín’s educational system.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “Good Quality Education for 
Development and Competitiveness” dimension, of the 
“Medellín, Path to Excellency and Quality” challenge, and 
of the programs: “Teachers, People of Knowledge” and 
“Promotion of citizens’ capacity and talent, as part of 
the proposal of the projects: “Teacher Training Systems”, 
and “Complementary Education for Strengthening 
Human Capacity”.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Parque Explora (Science and Technology Museum), 
Ruta N, and the Education Office of Medellín City 
Hall.

Platform partners
To strengthen this initiative of the Medellín 
Resilience Office together with the city’s public and 
private institutions, we are exploring the possibility 
of working with the UC Berkeley Center for 
Catastrophic Risk Management (CCRM) and Save 
the Children.

Term
Medium term - from two to three years.

1.J Science, Technology and Innovation
Fairs
This is an institutional and municipal program created 
according to Municipal Agreement 085 of 2009, to 
establish Science, Technology and Innovation Fairs in 
Medellín.  Under this agreement, Parque Explora creates 
science, technology and innovation fairs to  support 
developing educational processes in science, technology 
and innovation.  The fairs provide an opportunity for young 
people to interact with scientists and for participants to 
present their projects.

Objective
Contribute to the creation of a culture that has science, 
technology and innovation as fundamental components 
of social development, through the participation of 
elementary and middle school students.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “Good Quality Education for 
Development and Competitiveness” dimension, of the 
challenges: “Medellín, Path to Excellency and Quality” and 
“Innovative Medellín”, and of the programs: “Educational 
Community as a Place for Development” and “Science, 
Innovation and Technology for Society”, as part of the 
proposal of the projects: “Open School” and “Medellín 
Science, Technology and Innovation Plan”.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Parque Explora (Science and Technology Museum), 
Ruta N, and the Education Office of Medellín City 
Hall.

Platform partners
To strengthen this initiative of the Medellín 
Resilience Office together with the city’s public and 
private institutions, we are exploring the possibility 
of working with Save the Children.

Term
Medium term - from two to three years.

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

Photography: Archivo Departamento Administrativo de Planeación - Alcaldía de Medellín

GOAL 1  /  EquitAbLE MEdELLínGOAL 1  /  EquitAbLE MEdELLínGOAL 2

43

is  a 

resilient 

Medellín 

seeking 
transformation  through  leveraging  the  triad  of  security, 
coexistence and peace building. It is a process that we aim 
to consolidate with our new development plan “Medellín Is 
Counting on You”; a roadmap that we will follow this year 
and the next three years. 

city, 

The municipality’s Security and Coexistence Public Policy 
was  approved  in  September  2015.    It  aims  to  “increase 
the  capacity  of  the  citizens  and  institutions  to  govern 
phenomena  that  affect  security  and  coexistence”1. 
During  its  preparation,  the  concept  of  security  for  the 
city  was  redefined.  This  concept  observes  that  “security 
and  coexistence  are  not  exclusive  matters  to  crime  and 
criminality  (…),  they  are  phenomena  in  which  there  are 
very complex underlying relations of cause, which require 
comprehensive  interventions  that  implement  measures 
conceived  in  a  wide  spectrum  from  early  prevention  of 
violence  to  reestablishment  of  rights”2.  The  extension 
of this definition is not to be underestimated, because it 
allowed us to integrate strategic guidelines that as well as 
having an impact on security, seek social transformations 
for building peace in the region, key to the idea of making 
this a resilient city.
 
Therefore,  and  as  part  of  the  Development  Plan  and 
Security  and  Coexistence  Policy,  we  aim  to  build  peace 
in  our  region,  investing  in  training  citizens  to  take  on 
peaceful coexistence as  part of daily living. In addition, 

we aim to defend the role of democratic institutions as a 
tool for resolving conflicts, to avoid resorting to violence 
or  intermediation  of  illegal  powers.  We  aim  to  recover 
the  legitimacy  of  government  institutions  responsible  for 
ensuring security in the city and will work to build peace 
through  clear  access  to  justice,  especially  in  the  most 
vulnerable areas, and through the prevention of violence.

We will consolidate and invest in existing successful political 
initiatives  such  as  the  integration  of  former  fighters 
into  civil  life,  aiming  to  break  the  vicious  cycle  of  illegal 
activities, as well as work on the reparation of the victims 
of the armed conflict who live in vulnerable and isolated 
conditions.  The  government  has  also  been  leading  an 
exercise to rebuild a historical memory to help create  the 
cultural  transformations  that  the  city  needs.  Finally,  and 
as shown on the following pages, Medellín is a resilient city, 
because  we  are  focusing  our  efforts  on  achieving  equal 
rights for most socially vulnerable groups, such as young 
people and women. 

To  summarize,  we  understand  that  to  be  a  resilient  city,  
security is a right. In the current situation, this means the 
creation  and  strengthening  of  political  actions  to  build 
sustainable  peace  in  our  region  based  on  coexistence, 
recovery of the legitimacy of the government institutions, 
promotion  of 
justice, 
integration  of  former  fighters,  support  for  victims,  and 
reconstruction of remembrance.

local  democracies,  access  to 

SAFE AND
PEACEFUL
MEDELLÍN

Strengthen a more peaceful and 
socially cohesive society by 
promoting crime and violence 
prevention strategies and a culture 
of legality.

1. Medellín Council. Municipal Agreement # 021 / 2015, through which the Security and Coexistence Public Policy of the municipality of 
Medellín is approved. Medellín, September 4, 2015. 
2. Medellín City Hall. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Security and Coexistence Public Policy of the municipality of Medellín. 
Medellín, 2016. p. 9.

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

Luz Patricia Correa Madrigal
Director of the Municipal Victims’ Care and Reparations Unit

GOAL 2  /  SAfe And PeAcefuL MedeLLín44

45

Resilience Dividends
In line with the “resilience dividend”, this flagship 
initiative highlights the potential for co-benefits to result 
from its main objective of encouraging respect for life 
and sociocultural transformation through peaceful 
resolution of conflicts. By implementing this flagship 
initiative, we will support additional co-benefits in areas 
such as: social stability, security and justice; promotion 
of cohesive and committed communities; effective 
leadership and management; and empowerment 
of an extensive range of stakeholders. Specifically 
in the initiatives: Coexistence and Youth Citizen 
Culture; Young Women’s Talent Contest; Safe Cities for 
Women; International Forum: Peace; Women’s Voice; 
Management of the Municipal System of Human Rights 
and International Humanitarian Law (IHL); and Memory 
and Participation for Peace Building.

Acute shocks and chronic stresses addressed:
· Violence and conflict
· Crime and insecurity
· Limited access to justice
· Lack of better information management

Indicators
· Ensure social stability, security and justice: Measures 
that prevent crime.
· Promote cohesive and committed communities: 
Community participation, journalism and connectivity.
· Manage measures that promote a culture of peace 
and sociocultural transformation through guarantees of 
non-repetition.
· Access to programs that ensure citizen security.
· Development of methodologies that guarantee non-
repetition of violence.
· Strengthening of the human rights programs

The co-benefits that emanate from this flagship initiative 
further strengthen the overall resilience agenda for 
Medellin and exhibit the movement envisioned by the 
entire 100 Resilient Cities network.

Monitoring activities of the Resilience Office
Meetings with the professional team in charge of the 
project (one per month)

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

After an exhaustive review of the different initiatives and projects that have been implemented in the city, 
the Medellín Resilience Office proposes the following actions to achieve a safe and peaceful Medellín.

Flagship Initiative

2.A Strategy of Guarantees of
Non-Repetition of Violence (GNR)

This project is developed as a strategic guideline of the 
Security and Coexistence Public Policy of Medellín, and 
it is one of the legal instruments to determine what 
should be done so that violent acts are not repeated, 
aiming to generate strategies locally, regionally and 
nationally to ensure victims’ rights and to strengthen the 
political culture. The project aims to prevent violence, 
and provide reparation for victims. This will allow 
the population to participate in the development of 
agreements that contribute to a long-lasting culture of 
peace. 

Objective
Promote respect for life, and social and cultural 
transformation through that facilitates the peaceful 
resolution of conflicts.

Specific objectives
• Identify the causes of the violence that has occurred as 
part of the armed conflict in Medellín, and what needs 
to be done so that this does not happen again.
• Conduct state of the art academic research as well as 
an inventory of local art projects that have sought to 
deal with the armed conflict.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “Recovering Security and 
Citizen Coexistence” dimension, of the “Medellín Is 
Counting on You to Build Peace in the Region” challenge, 
and of the “Promotion of Human Rights” program, as 
part of the proposal of the project: “Comprehensive 
Care for Victims and/or Witnesses of Crimes with High 
Social Impact”.

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

Parties responsible for its implementation
Peace and Post-conflict Committee of Medellín, 
Medellín City Hall.

Platform partners
Together with the city’s public and private 
institutions, the Medellín Resilience Office is working 
on the identification of strategic platform partners 
that are part of the 100 Resilient Cities Program to 
strengthen this initiative.

Term
Long term - four years or more.

GOAL 2  /  SAfe And PeAcefuL MedeLLínGOAL 2  /  SAfe And PeAcefuL MedeLLín46

Other initiatives that support the goal: 
Safe and Peaceful Medellín

2.B Youth Citizen Culture and
Coexistence

This initiative executes, manages, coordinates and 
supports the city’s projects and programs focused on 
young people. The initiative will work toward generating 
projects for young people that encourage trust, 
coexistence and regional peace. This will strengthen 
participation in projects such as: Youth Week, Youth 
Communication Seminar, and Outstanding Young 
People, to enrich the personal and collective life of the 
youth population.

Objective
Generate and support strategies that promote, and help 
guarantee young people’s rights and freedoms, and at 
the same time strengthen their positive development in 
coexistence with others and their environment.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “We Believe in Citizen Culture” 
dimension, of the “Medellín Culture” challenge, and of 
the “Citizen Training” program, as part of the proposal 
of the project: “Youth Citizen Culture and Coexistence”.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Youth Office - Medellín City Hall.

Platform partners
To strengthen this initiative of the Medellín 
Resilience Office together with the city’s public and 
private institutions, we are exploring the possibility 
of working with Save the Children.

Term
Medium term - from two to three years.

2.C Young Women’s Talent Contest

This is a contest designed to award women aged 
between 16 and 25 for their intellectual, scientific, social, 
sport and artistic skills.  It is carried out according to 
Decree 2013000870 of May 14, 2013, as a mechanism 
for integration, support and praise of the young women 
of Medellín. 

It is comprised of six categories:
1. Leadership and Organization; 2. Physical Culture; 3. 
Art; 4. Science and Technology; 5.  Business Enterprise; 
and 6. Environment.

Objective
Recognize and empower the intellectual, artistic, 
enterprise, social, sport, academic and research skills of 
the young women of Medellín.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “Recovering Security and 
Citizen Coexistence” dimension, of the “Safe Medellín” 
challenge, and of the “Safe Medellín for Women and 
Girls” program, as part of the proposal of the project: 
“Public Communication for the Positive Empowerment of 
Women’s Rights”.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Women’s Office - Medellín City Hall.

Platform partners
Together with the city’s public and private 
institutions, the Medellín Resilience Office is working 
on the identification of strategic platform partners 
that are part of the 100 Resilient Cities Program to 
strengthen this initiative.

Term
Short term - less than one year.

2.D Safe Cities for Women

This initiative develops, implements and evaluates 
comprehensive tools, policies and approaches for the 
prevention of and response to sexual harassment and 
other forms of sexual violence against women and girls 
in different environments. Since June 2015, Medellín has 
been part of the group of 22 cities that form the Safe 
Cities Global Initiative of UN Women. 

This initiative, which started in 2010, is the first global 
program to prevent and respond to sexual assault 
against women in public places.  

47

Objective
Develop, test and publicize models of action to prevent 
and reduce sexual assault and violence against women 
and girls in urban public places.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “Recovering Security and 
Citizen Coexistence” dimension, of the “Safe Medellín” 
challenge, and of the “Safe Medellín for Women and 
Girls” program, as part of the proposal of the project: 
“Safe Places for Women and Girls”.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Women’s Office, Security Office, and Government 
Office.

Platform partners
Together with the city’s public and private 
institutions, the Medellín Resilience Office is working 
on the identification of strategic platform partners 
that are part of the 100 Resilient Cities Program to 
strengthen this initiative.

Term
Medium term - from two to three years.

Photography “Alcaldía de Medellín”

2.E International Forum: Peace and
Women’s Voice as Part of the Agenda
of Women for Peace (Agenda de las
Mujeres por la Paz)

This initiative provides master talks, panels and 
conferences open to all, focusing on educational 
strategies and actions that can transform the language 
of war into narratives of peace and coexistence to 
resolve conflict.

The forum is a coordinated effort between several 
entities focusing on the role of Colombian women in 
peace building.

The Agenda of Women for Peace was formulated in 
2014 by the Departmental Government of Antioquia 
and Medellín City Hall, which completes an interactive 
process with different women from each of the nine 
regions of Antioquia and from the 16 comunas and 
5 districts of Medellín. It aimed to “transform words 
into actions in the fabric of life and peace”, as a highly 
symbolic example for women. 

GOAL 2  /  SAfe And PeAcefuL MedeLLínGOAL 2  /  SAfe And PeAcefuL MedeLLín48

META 2  /  MEDELLÍN SEGURA Y EN PAZ

49

Objective
Create an area to reflect on the sense and meaning of 
peace for women.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Security and Coexistence Office - Medellín City 
Hall.

Relation to the development plan
This project has previously been implemented in the city 
through a public-private partnership.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Office of Gender Equality for Women of the 
Departmental Government of Antioquia and the 
Women’s Office of Medellín City Hall. 

Platform partners
Together with the city’s public and private 
institutions, the Medellín Resilience Office is working 
on the identification of strategic platform partners 
that are part of the 100 Resilient Cities Program to 
strengthen this initiative.

Term
Short term - less than one year.

2.F Promotion and Training to
Strengthen Citizen Skills for
Coexistence

This action aims to implement context specific strategies 
designed to improve management of coexistence and 
security, to address the problems resulting from the 
violent resolution of conflict.

Objective
Encourage citizen coexistence through the 
communication of the principles of coexistence in the 16 
comunas and five districts of Medellín. Promote self-
regulation and joint responsibility of the citizens through 
fostering reflection and action around coexistence.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “Recovering Security and 
Citizen Coexistence” dimension, of the “In Medellín We 
All Live Together” challenge, and of the “Promotion 
of Coexistence” program, as part of the project: 
“Promotion and Training to Strengthen Citizen Skills for 
Coexistence”.

Platform partners
Together with the city’s public and private 
institutions, the Medellín Resilience Office is working 
on the identification of strategic platform partners 
that are part of the 100 Resilient Cities Program to 
strengthen this initiative.

Term
Long term - four years or more.

 
2.G Management of the Municipal
System of Human Rights and
International Humanitarian Law (IHL)
This project aims to promote the effective enjoyment 
of rights and the prompt protection of those rights by 
the State. The Municipal System of Human Rights and 
International Humanitarian Law (IHL) is a coordinating 
and organizational strategy of all matters related 
to human rights and IHL. It organizes regulations, 
policies, entities and regional actors by the following 
central themes: citizenship; culture and education 
in human, civil and political rights; IHL and armed 
conflict; economic, social, cultural and environmental 
rights; justice and fight against impunity; equality; no 
discrimination; and respect for identity.

Objective
Coordinate the protection, promotion and guarantee of 
citizens’ human rights with the national and international 
authority.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “Recovering Security and 
Citizen Coexistence” dimension, of the “Medellín Is 
Counting on You to Build Peace in the Region” challenge, 
and of the “Promotion of Human Rights” program, as 
part of the project: “Management of the Municipal 
System of Human Rights and International Humanitarian 
Law”.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Office of Social Inclusion, Family and Human Rights 
- Medellín City Hall.

Platform partners
Together with the city’s public and private 
institutions, the Medellín Resilience Office is working 
on the identification of strategic platform partners 
that are part of the 100 Resilient Cities Program to 
strengthen this initiative.

Term
Medium term - from two to three years.

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

Objective
Develop interactive exercises to reconstruct and remember 
the city’s conflict and work with citizens on post-conflict 
solutions.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “Recovering Security and Citizen 
Coexistence” dimension, of the “Medellín Is Counting on 
You to Build Peace in the Region” challenge, and of the 
“Memory and Participation for Peace Building” program, as 
part of the projects: “Interactive Construction of Regional 
Memories”, “Active Citizenship for the Post-Conflict”, 
“Women Peace Builders”, and “Education in Medellín Invests 
in Peace and Coexistence”.

2.H Memory and Participation for
Peace Building
This action is aimed at establishing direct talks between 
communities and actors in conflict to strengthen 
scenarios of peace and to be able to progress in the 
true reconciliation of society. This project considers the 
voices of the victims, State agents and people in the 
process of integration, who experienced different aspects 
of the conflict, and where often the roles of victim and 
victimizer were confused. Gender will also be considered to 
differentiate between the experiences of men and women, 
which may contribute to breaking the cycle of conflict.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Casa de la Memoria Museum, Women’s Office, and 
Education Office.

Platform partners
Together with the city’s public and private institutions, 
the Medellín Resilience Office is working on the 
identification of strategic platform partners that are 
part of the 100 Resilient Cities Program to strengthen 
this initiative.

Term
Medium term - from two to three years.

GOAL 2  /  SAfe And PeAcefuL MedeLLínMEDELLÍN

IS INSPIRED

from 100 Resilient Cities Network 
Since its cre(cid:22)tion, 100 Resilient Cities Network h(cid:22)s f(cid:22)cilit(cid:22)ted 
the le(cid:22)rnin(cid:8)/sh(cid:22)rin(cid:8) (cid:22)cross cities. 

 

Río de JaneiroRIO OPERATIONS CENTER“It is a new form of governance. Our work is to know the limitations and capacities of our partners to promote quicker and more effective actions." Pedro Junqueira, CRO of Rio de JaneiroThe Rio Operations Center has been operating since December 2010, with more than 900 cameras and 500 employees. Through three daily operational meetings data driven decisions can be made. Through an agreement with Waze, the Rio Operations Center has information about congestion hot spots. Additionally, the location of security personnel is monitored through their cellphones, for quick deployment around the city.In areas where there is a high-risk of landsides, sirens have been installed to alert the population. Additionally, there is a series of rain gauges located in strategic points around the city to measure rainfall and identify areas potentially at risk from flooding. Community leaders can then be notified, so that they can appropriately prepare.Political will is the most important thing needed to achieve such an integrated information system.New OrleansDEVELOP KNOWLEDGE AND CAPACITY OF EMERGING ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSThis initiative proposes educating young people so that they actively facilitate connections that prioritize development and care of the environment.  Additionally, it proposes being prepared to respond to possible disasters. The city's different organizations, such as museums and information centers, are provided as places of experiential learning for young people, where they can study and be informed about the environment. This project tries to go beyond geography that is studied in classrooms. Using New Orleans as a city laboratory.  This allows people to learn about their environment through experiential techniques.Together with the project's different partners, such as teachers, designers, experts on water issues, and city organizations, the students participate in design challenges under national scientific standards.  The involvement of young people in planning the city's future is essential to ensure resilience, because it is their future, and they will need good examples to follow, to make sure the world is a sustainable place for human life.Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez Photography taken Resilience Strategy New OrleansPhotography Oscar Cardona ÁlvarezGOAL 3

53

SUSTAINABLE
AND RISK-
PREPARED
MEDELLÍN

Create a sustainable and risk-prepared 
city through greater management of land 
and infrastructure, sustainable 
transportation, environmental planning 
and adequate management of the natural 
resources and quality of life for its citizens.

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

Talking about risk management undoubtedly 
means talking about social regions, more humane regions, 
resilient  regions  and  everyone’s  struggle  to  recover  from 
and overcome difficulties. The challenge is to create safe 
areas,  and  environmentally  sustainable  and  safe  cities, 
as  established  by  Law  1523  of  2012,  in  paragraph  1  of 
Article  1:  Risk  management  is  an  essential  development 
policy to ensure sustainability; regional security; collective 
interests  and  rights;  and  improvement  of  the  quality  of 
life  of  populations  and  communities  at  risk.  Therefore,  it 
is intrinsically related to the planning of safe development, 
and  to  sustainable  environmental  management  of  the 
land,  at  all  levels  of  governance  and  with  the  effective 
participation of the population.

it 

is  understood  that  risk  management 

When 
is  a 
comprehensive  social  process  where  community  and 
collective work comes before individual and private work, 
opportunities can be developed to strengthen the resilience 
capacity of the people and the whole society. However, if 
risk  management  is  not  tied  to  community  participation 
as a central theme of the risk reduction policies, it cannot 
solely be the tool or the path to prepare the communities 
to face the historical challenge of populating the land.

Returning  to  look  at  the  basis  of  society,  preparing  the 
communities to be the agents of their own development, 

empowering  them  and  making  them  active  must  be 
the  ultimate  goal  of  all  the  resilience-centered  risk 
management  policies.  Providing  all  the  tools  so  that  the 
communities  know  how  to  identify  their  risks  is  another 
way  of  making  them  more  resilient  in  order  to  ensure 
the  continuity  of  the  services  and  benefits  that  become 
available their urban areas.

Therefore, making Medellín a sustainable, balanced city in 
harmony  with  everything  that  surrounds  it  is  a  task  that 
despite being difficult has not been neglected. Currently, 
Medellín is working on building a comprehensive perspective 
of risk management based on the population’s leaderships, 
and focused on great community participation to reduce 
the social, economic and environmental vulnerabilities. 

Given  that  risk  management  is  a  responsibility  of  all  the 
authorities and residents of the region (Article 21 of Law 
1523), the sum of all these actions helps the inhabitants 
on  their  land  to  identify  the  risks  and  strengthen  their 
skills, generating work in a network that, coordinated with 
institutional action, achieves a real cultural transformation 
that fosters new ways for us to understand and interpret 
reality,  and  makes  us  increasingly  more  adaptive  to  the 
challenges that our environmental and urban surroundings 
pose each day.

Camilo Zapata Wills
Director of the DAGRD

GOAL 3  /  SuStAinAbLe And RiSk-PRePARed MedeLLín54

GOAL 3  /  SUSTAINAbLE AND RISk-PREPARED MEDELLÍN

GOAL 3  /  SUSTAINAbLE AND RISk-PREPARED MEDELLÍN

55

Resilience Dividends
In line with the “resilience dividend”, this flagship 
initiative highlights the potential for co-benefits 
to result from its main objective of strengthening 
community risk management through the local 
committees and the building agents, such as master 
builders, in order to generate greater appropriation 
of the technical components of risk prevention 
and of the Early-Warning System to promote their 
participation in the communities as leaders in risk 
management. By implementing this flagship initiative, 
we will  support additional co-benefits such as: 
essential services, natural and man-made assets, 
social cohesion, promotion of integrated and long-
term planning, effective management and leadership, 
and empowerment of a wide range of stakeholders. 
Specifically in the initiatives: Comprehensive Project to 
Rehabilitate the Hillside -Anticipating Illegal Growth on 
the Hillsides of Medellín-; Risk Awareness and Reduction 
Program (CRRP for the Spanish acronym); Resilience 
Laboratory; Risk Assurance and Transfer for Resilient 
Cities; Strengthening of the Early-Warning System; 
Pilot Project for Preventative Resettlement of Land at 
Immitigable Risk; and Our River.

Acute shocks and chronic stresses addressed: 
· Violence and conflict
· Landslides
· Structural deterioration
· Illegal settlement
· Displacement
· Poor quality urban planning
· Earthquakes 

Indicators 
· Ensure the continuity of essential services: Emergency 
plans for essential services.
· Maintain, create and improve natural and man-made 
assets: Environmental policies.
· Promote cohesive and committed communities 
Community participation, journalism and connectivity.
· Encourage integrated and long-term planning: 
Monitoring and data management, strategies and plans.
· Promote leadership and effective management: 
Emergency coordination and capacity, alignment of the 
government.
· Empower a wide range of stakeholders: Understanding 
of the risks.
· Social Offices of the DAGRD prepared and trained on 
risk management.

Monitoring activities of the Resilience Office
• Build and develop the workshops to carry out with the 
local risk management committees.
• Find the experts to train the committees on issues of 
local risk management.
• Focus groups with the professional team of the DAGRD.

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

The Medellín Resilience Office has reviewed different initiatives and projects that are being implemented in 
the city, and others that are planned for the future.  According to this process, we consider that the actions 
to achieve a sustainable and risk-prepared Medellín are as follows.

Flagship Initiative

3.A Strengthening of Community
Risk Management

This is a pilot project that aims to train a group selected 
from the 102 local risk management committees located 
in the neighborhoods of Medellín. These committees are 
responsible for identifying and alerting the communities 
about the possible natural risks that may occur, so they 
can take preventative measures to save lives. 

The main topics are focused on disaster prevention, 
and the mitigation strategies during an event, 
requiring community risk management, early-warning 
social networks, social mapping of risk, and disaster 
management strategies.

Overall objective
Strengthen community risk management through the 
local committees and the construction sector, such as 
master builders, in order to generate greater use of 
risk prevention technologies and techniques and of the 
Early-Warning System to promote their role in their 
communities as leaders of risk management. 

Specific objectives
• Train ten local risk management committees on 
prevention and response (what to do before and after 
an event). 
· Training builders, city officials, and private 
stakeholders, in seismic evaluation and retrofit design 
and construction on existing informal houses, to 
mitigate seismic risk. Including research, development of 
technical resources, evaluation of existing homes, design 
and construction of mitigation solutions (structural and 
architectural retrofits). This, leveraging the Medellin’s 
existing home improvement and structural upgrade 
subsidy.
• Train a group of informal builders on regulations and 
appropriate foundations for construction.
• Install early-warning communication networks.
• Prepare social maps of risk, resilience and disaster 
management.
• Coordinate information between the neighborhood risk 

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

management committees.
• Generate strategies for prompt communication of 
information.
• Improve the information of the Early-Warning System.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “A City Investment in Care 
of the Environment” dimension, of the “Medellín 
Manages Risk” challenge, and of the “Risk Reduction 
and Mitigation” program, as part of the project: 
“Strengthening of the DAGRD”.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Medellín Resilience Office, and the Administrative 
Department of Disaster Risk Management 
(Departamento Administrativo de Gestíon del 
Riesgo de Desastres, DAGRD).

Platform partners
To strengthen this initiative of the Medellín 
Resilience Office together with the city’s public and 
private institutions, we are working in partnership 
with: Build Change and Escuela Latinoamericana 
de Desarrollo Local Sostenible y Resiliente 
(ELADES).

Term:
Short term - less than one year.

56

57

Other initiatives that support the goal: 
Sustainable and Risk Prepared Medellín

3.C Risk Knowledge and Reduction
Program (CRRP)

This program focuses on the community’s active 
participation in planning processes to reduce the risk of 
disasters. It will identify and prioritize risk scenarios to 
reduce the risk of failure of infrastructure, and to ensure 
economic recovery of the market systems existing in the 
neighborhoods.  The program will focus on populations 
in the peripheral areas of Medellin as needing the most 
support in disaster reduction. 

The areas of work are as follows: 1. Policy and planning in 
disaster risk management; 2. Housing and settlements, 
my house as a safe place; and 3. Economic recovery and 
market systems.

Objective
Reduce the social and economic impact of disasters in 
highly vulnerable populations of Medellín.

Relation to the development plan
This project has been implemented in the city since 2015 
with international funding and the support of the DAGRD.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Universidad Pontificia Bolivariana (UPB), and 
the Administrative Department of Disaster Risk 
Management (Departamento Administrativo de 
Gestíon del Riesgo de Desastres, DAGRD).

Platform partners
Together with the city’s public and private 
institutions, the Medellín Resilience Office is working 
on the identification of strategic platform partners 
that are part of the 100 Resilient Cities Program to 
strengthen this initiative.

Term
Medium term - from two to three years.

3.B Comprehensive Project to Resettle
the Hillside -Anticipating Illegal
Settlement on the Hillsides of Medellín-

Through the implementation of green infrastructure and 
the consolidation of a productive landscape, the aim is 
to mitigate risk and prepare for housing settlement in 
high-risk areas of the city.

The project needs to be implemented through 
collaborative self-management such that the 
community is a central agent in the co-creation and 
implementation of the processes. This is essential to 
ensure future sustainability of the interventions, and the 
communities’ empowerment in controlling and governing 
the land.

Objective
Define strategies and processes for the collaborative 
construction of a sustainable habitat on the high parts 
of the city’s hillsides through the implementation of 
control actions and anticipation of the settlement of 
the illegal urban boundaries of the city to prevent new 
disasters from occurring.

Relation to the development plan
This project was designed by a private institute of the 
city focused on urban and environmental studies and 
had the support of the DAGRD, and the Administrative 
Department of Planning of Medellín.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Center for Urban and Environmental Studies 
(URBAM), and the Administrative Department of 
Planning of Medellín.

Platform partners
Together with the city’s public and private 
institutions, the Medellín Resilience Office is working 
on the identification of strategic platform partners 
that are part of the 100 Resilient Cities Program to 
strengthen this initiative.

Term
Medium term - from two to three years.

3.D Resilience Laboratory

This is a proposal to bring together a committee of 
high-level strategic planning advisors of to identify 
urban development strategies. These strategies will 
be delivered to the appropriate authorities to create 
projects that can influence the region and progress the 
city’s sustainability.

Objective
Create a permanent committee that reflects on the 
city’s planning processes and that develops strategic  
plans relating to the urban and social development to 
the city.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “Good Quality Education for 
Development and Competitiveness” dimension, of the 
“Innovative Medellín” challenge, and of the “Science, 
Technology and Innovation for Society” program, as part 
of the project: “Creation Laboratories”.

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

Parties responsible for its implementation
Medellín Resilience Office, and the Administrative 
Department of Planning of Medellín.

Platform partners
To strengthen this initiative of the Medellín 
Resilience Office together with the city’s public and 
private institutions, we are working in partnership 
with: Fundación Mario Santo Domingo (FMSD), and 
Pacífico.

Term
Long term - four years or more.

3.E Risk Assurance and Transfer for
Resilient Cities

This is a study to design risk transfer solutions for natural 
disasters through insurance strategies and companies.  
To achieve this, disaster risk is assessed and quantified, 
to define and measure the resulting liabilities. Using 
this information, the aim is to design a comprehensive 
financing strategy, taking into account the frequency 
and severity of the events, which  improves the 
city’s capacity to respond after disasters without 
compromising the sustainability of public finances. 

GOAL 3  /  SuStAinAbLe And RiSk-PRePARed MedeLLínGOAL 3  /  SuStAinAbLe And RiSk-PRePARed MedeLLínParties responsible for its implementation
Medellín Social, Housing and Habitat Institute 
(Instituto Social de Vivienda y Hábitat de Medellín, 
ISVIMED).

Platform partners
To strengthen this initiative of the Medellín 
Resilience Office together with the city’s public and 
private institutions, we are working in partnership 
with Build Challenge, Risk Management
Solutions (RMS), and World Bank Treasury.
We are also exploring the possibility of working with 
SwissRe.

Term
Medium term - from two to three years.

3.H Our River

This project intends to repair the stream channels 
through the coordination between different regional 
bodies facilitating the generation of comprehensive 
sanitation through: 1. Resettlement of housing that is 
not respecting the withdrawal areas; 2. Implementation 
of non-conventional drainage systems to prevent the 
direct discharge of wastewater into the streams; 3. 
Recovery of flora and fauna; 4. Implementation of paths 
alongside the streams; 5. Silviculture processes related 
to the banks that foster and encourage water recovery; 
6. Prevention of floods or landslides that compromise 
the lives of citizens on the banks or surrounding areas; 

59

7. Fostering ecological corridors, civil interventions for 
hydraulic works that minimize the risk or threats that in 
turn, improve the physical and chemical conditions of 
the water supply; and 8. Environmental education and 
social appropriation with the surrounding communities 
of the withdrawal areas for the protection of the streams 
associated with the Sponsorship Plan.

Objective
Social and ecological recovery of the basin of the Aburrá 
River through restoration strategies that increase the 
ecosystem services for the city.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “A City Investment in Care of 
the Environment” dimension, of the “Medellín, a Green 
and Sustainable City” challenge, and of the “Our River 
and its Streams” program, as part of the project: “Our 
River”.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Environment Office.

Platform partners
To strengthen this initiative of the Medellín 
Resilience Office together with the city’s public and 
private institutions, we are exploring the possibility 
of working with: The Latin American Water Funds 
Partnership: The Nature Conservancy  (TNC) and 
Inter-American Development Bank  (IDB). 

Term
Long term - four years or more.

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

58

Objective
Together with cities that have decided to transfer their 
risk with insurance companies, create a comprehensive 
strategy for the management of catastrophic risks in 
Medellín. 

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “A City Investment in Care 
of the Environment” dimension, of the “Medellín 
Manages Risk” challenge, and of the “Risk Reduction 
and Mitigation” program, as part of the project: “Risk 
Assurance and Transfer”.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Administrative Department of Disaster Risk 
Management (Departamento Administrativo de 
Gestíon del Riesgo de Desastres, DAGRD).

Platform partners
To strengthen this initiative of the Medellín 
Resilience Office together with the city’s public and 
private institutions, we are working in partnership 
with the World Bank Treasury.
We are also exploring the possibility of working with 
other platform partners, such as: Risk Management 
Solutions (RMS) and SwissRe.

Objective
Collect information from the accelerometer, the rain 
gauges and the hydrometeorological network to deliver 
it to the responsible authorities and the general public so 
that they are aware of the risks and can take measures 
in time.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “A City Investment in Care of 
the Environment” dimension, of the “Medellín Manages 
Risk” challenge, and of the “Risk Awareness” program, 
as part of the project: “Strengthening of the SIATA and 
Innovation for Risk Management”.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Administrative Department of Disaster Risk 
Management (Departamento Administrativo de 
Gestíon del Riesgo de Desastres, DAGRD).

Platform partners
To strengthen this initiative of the Medellín 
Resilience Office together with the city’s public and 
private institutions, we are working in partnership 
with Pacífico.
We are also exploring the possibility of working with 
the American Geophysical Union (AGU).

Term
Long term - four years or more.

Term
Long term - four years or more.

3.F Strengthening of the Early-Warning 
Environmental System - SIATA

Through the Early-Warning Environmental System 
(SIATA) of the municipality of Medellín, a prognostic 
atmospheric model and a hydrological response model 
will be implemented in the basin of Valle de Aburrá 
River  to develop an appropriate forecast model for the  
Medellin’s topography. The operation and maintenance 
of the networks form part of the SIATA - Accelerograph 
Network of Medellín (RAM for the Spanish acronym) 
and the Hydrometeorological Network….  Through the 
regular collection and processing of the information 
stored in each accelerograph, we will obtain useful 
tools for the analysis and design of earthquake-
resistant structures. Additionally, the information will 
be publicized through the internet and printed material 
for distribution with biannual editions for a technical 
audience and additionally, the maintenance, update 
and/or replacement of prioritization and quantification 
equipment.

3.G Pilot Project for Preventative 
Resettlement of Land with Unmitigable 
Risk

This project consists of solutions for resettling 
populations located in areas where the risk cannot be 
mitigated (because of movements of land or risk of 
flooding) to sustainable areas more suitable for living.

Objective
Progressively reduce conditions of threat or risk, improve 
living conditions and intervene in one of the regions 
prioritized in the Land Management Plan, developing 
a comprehensive methodology that includes criteria to 
protect inhabitants and promote sustainability.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “Comprehensive Intervention 
in the Land and Recovery of the Center” dimension, of 
the “Suitable Habitat for Medellín” challenge, and of 
the “Comprehensive Resettlement of the Population” 
program, as part of the project: “Pilot Project for 
Preventative Resettlement of Land at Immitigable Risk”.

GOAL 3  /  SuStAinAbLe And RiSk-PRePARed MedeLLínGOAL 3  /  SuStAinAbLe And RiSk-PRePARed MedeLLínGOAL 4

61

THE ROLE OF INFORMATION MANAGEMENT TO 
COLLECTIVELY bUILD RESILIENT CITIES

Medellín 

is  a  city  that  generates  data 
on  a  daily  basis  that  is  useful  for  more  than  creating 
indicators.   The data must be used to analyze the city’s 
situations, problems and challengesthrough integration in 
to qualitative processes to make more informed decisions 
and  development  plans.  These  activities  will  ensure  the 
sustainability and quality of life for  citizens.

We  must  take  advantage  of  technological  progress  and 
the  development  of  collaborative  platforms  that  provide 
government  and  citizens  with  an    equal  understanding 
of the current state of the city. This will help  to identify 
successful  solutions  to  problems  and  challenges  on  a 
sustained basis

  Open  data  generates  trust  between  the  public  sector 
and  the  citizenry.  It  forms  the  basis  for  jointly  creating 
proposals for the city in a collaborative and transparent 
manner that integrates and involves all actors of society in 
the process, giving them the power of knowledge to think, 
analyze and build a better city.

In  the  future,  this  dynamic  will  be  essential  to  plan  and 
develop resilient cities based on knowledge, dissemination 
and reuse of data in an open format.

WELL-
INFORMED
AND ENGAGED
MEDELLÍN

Foster a well-informed city through 
improved access to information and 
data management that facilitates the 
analysis and transfer of knowledge for 
strategic planning of the city and 
effective governance.

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

Paola Pollmeier
Coordinator Open Innovation - Ruta N

GOAL 4  /  WeLL-infOrmed And enGAGed medeLLín 
 
62

GOAL 4  /  WELL-INFORMED AND ENGAGED MEDELLÍN

GOAL 4  /  WELL-INFORMED AND ENGAGED MEDELLÍN

63

Resilience Dividends
In line with the “resilience dividend”, this flagship 
initiative highlights the potential for co-benefits to result 
from its main objective of integrating and coordinating 
the city’s information in a single system, which the 
public and private entities and the communities can 
access as they need. By implementing this flagship 
initiative, we will support additional co-benefits in 
areas such as: social cohesion, integrated and long-
term planning, effective management and leadership, 
and empowerment of a wide range of stakeholders. 
Specifically in the initiatives: Communication Strategy 
- Medellín Told through the Transformation of the 
Region-, Think Tank for the Construction of Indicators 
- Think Tank, My Medellín: Online strategy for citizen 
participation, and the network of observatories for 
tracking social impact.

Acute shocks and chronic stresses addressed:
· Lack of better information management
· Limited communication in the community 

Indicators
· Promote cohesive and committed communities: social 
communication and connectivity.
· Encourage integrated and long-term planning: 
Monitoring and data management.
· Promote leadership and effective management: 
Alignment of the stakeholders. Coordination and 
capacity in emergencies.
· Empower a wide range of stakeholders: Communication 
between the government and the public.
· Access to open data. 
· Construction of an information integration 
methodology.

Monitoring activities of the Resilience Office
Focus groups with different actors of the city that build 
and manage the information of the different areas and 
offices of the city (one per month).

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

For approximately two years, the Medellín Resilience Office reviewed different initiatives and projects that 
were being implemented in the city, and other new ones that have been proposed. After this review pro-
cess, we consider that the main actions proposed to achieve a well-informed Medellín are as follows.

Flagship Initiative

4.A Agency for the Management
and Integration of Information

This project will create a neutral agency to integrate 
and coordinate the city’s information. Public and private 
entities will be able to obtain reliable and up-to-date 
information from the agency.

Overall objective
Integrate and coordinate the city’s information in a 
single system that public and private entities and the 
communities can access as they need. 

Specific objectives
• Build a visual and physical platform that integrates the 
information.
• Generate a decision-making culture among citizens 
based on up-to-date and reliable information.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “We Believe in Citizen Culture” 
dimension, of the “Medellín Culture” challenge, and 
of the “Public Innovation - Governance Laboratory” 
program, as part of the proposal of the project: 
“Integration and Strategic Management of Information 
– Think Tank”.

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

Parties responsible for its implementation
Medellín Resilience Office, and Medellín City Hall.

Platform partners
Together with the city’s public and private 
institutions, the Medellín Resilience Office is working 
on the identification of strategic platform partners 
that are part of the 100 Resilient Cities Program to 
strengthen this initiative.

Term
Short term - one year.

64

GOAL 4  /  WELL-INFORMED AND ENGAGED MEDELLÍN

GOAL 4  /  WELL-INFORMED AND ENGAGED MEDELLÍN

65

Parties responsible for its implementation
Ruta N, and Medellín City Hall.

Platform partners
Together with the city’s public and private 
institutions, the Medellín Resilience Office is working 
on the identification of strategic platform partners 
that are part of the 100 Resilient Cities Program to 
strengthen this initiative.

Term
Medium term - from two to three years.

Objective
Promote the exchange of information and facilitate the 
analysis of the city’s main problems. 

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “We Believe in Citizen Culture” 
dimension, of the “Medellín Culture” challenge, and 
of the “Public Innovation - Governance Laboratory” 
program, as part of the proposal of the project: 
“Network of Social Observatories for Tracking Social 
Impact”.

4.E Network of Social Observatories for
Tracking Social Impact

The public policy assessment and observatory unit will 
be improved to empower the city’s research capacity in 
terms of social intervention, social impact, and efficiency 
of public investment.  Therefore, partnerships will be 
coordinated with the city’s different public and private 
research centers, think tanks, and study centers.

It will also invest in the different tools for the production 
of good quality, timely and reliable statistical 
information that supports decision-making and research 
that account for Medellín’s situation in the different 
dimensions of development.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Ruta N, and Medellín City Hall.

Platform partners
Together with the city’s public and private 
institutions, the Medellín Resilience Office is working 
on the identification of strategic platform partners 
that are part of the 100 Resilient Cities Program to 
strengthen this initiative.

Term
Medium term - from two to three years.

Photography: Oscar Cardona Álvarez

Other initiatives that support the goal: 
Well-Informed and Engaged Medellín

4.B Communication Strategy 
-Medellin’s Story Told Through the 
Transformation of the Region

This action consists of producing a mini documentary 
series with five chapters and a summary, which will 
tell Medellín’s story of demographic transformation. 
The narrative will be based on direct interviews to 
give a voice to the people who have participated 
in the city’s urban and social transformation.  The 
recommended chapters for the documentary are  urban 
transformation, mobility, education, culture, innovation, 
security and coexistence. It also aims to design a 
communications strategy that facilitates the spreading 
and distribution of the documentary.

Objective
Rebuild and document the multiple stories of the people 
that describe the urban and social transformation of 
Medellín generated by the planning processes.

Relation to the development plan
It is a project conceived and designed by the Medellín 
Resilience Office to seek partnerships in the public and 
private sector that facilitate its development.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Medellín Resilience Office, and the Planning Office 
of Medellín City Hall.

Platform partners
Together with the city’s public and private 
institutions, the Medellín Resilience Office is working 
on the identification of strategic platform partners 
that are part of the 100 Resilient Cities Program to 
strengthen this initiative.

Term
Short term - one year.

4.C Think Tank for Creating Indicators

Alongside the Office of Resilience this Think Tank   will 
create objective indicators to assess the city’s initiatives 
supporting the resilience strategy. This action arises from 
the need to assess the impact of the social processes on 
the people and the region.

Objective
Support the creation of objective indicators for 
qualitative and quantitative assessment of the programs 
and projects that the city’s public and private entities 
implement.

Relation to the development plan
It is a project conceived and designed by the Medellín 
Resilience Office to seek partnerships in the public and 
private sector that facilitate its development.

Parties responsible for its implementation
Medellín Resilience Office.

Platform partners
To strengthen this initiative, the Medellín Resilience 
Office together with the city’s public and private 
institutions is working in partnership with Fundación 
Mario Santo Domingo (FMSD).

Term
Long term - four years or more.

4.D My Medellín: Digital Strategy for
Citizen Participation

Maintain the online participation of people over the four 
years, to use it as a channel for listening, through which 
the city’s public administration can keep receiving ideas 
for the development of Medellín.

Objective
Increase the community’s participation in the city’s 
planning processes through digital technology.

Relation to the development plan
This action is part of the “We Believe in Citizen Culture” 
dimension, of the “Medellín Culture” challenge, and 
of the “Public Innovation - Governance Laboratory” 
program, as part of the proposal of the project: “Digital 
Participation Strategy for Public Administration”.

66

Acknowledgments

This Resilience Strategy for Medellín was possible thanks to the inspiration of the people who formed part of the work 
groups and the planning activities.  Especially to the following teams:

Public and Private Institutions of the City

Medellín City Hall
Municipal Victims’ Care and Reparations Unit
Administrative Department of Disaster Risk 
Management (Departamento Administrativo 
de Gestíon del Riesgo de Desastres, DAGRD)
Medellín Metropolitan Area
Administrative Planning Department
Medellín Metro System
Women’s Office
Parque Explora (Science and Technology 
Museum)
Medellín Sports and Recreation Institute 
(Instituto de Deportes y Recreación de 
Medellín, INDER).
Center for Urban and Environmental Studies 
(URBAM)
Casa de la Memoria Museum
Ruta N Medellín, and Innovation and Business 
Center (Centro de Innovación y Negocios)
Corporación Región
Proantioquia
Empresas Públicas de Medellín (EPM)
Global Communities
Global Shapers
Universidad Pontificia Bolivariana (UPB) 
Peace and Post-conflict Committee of 
Medellín
Telemedellín Channel
Mesa Voces de Paz (Roundtable of Voices for 
Peace)
Agencia de Educación Superior de Medellín 
(SAPIENCIA)
Early-Warning System (SIATA) 
Agencia de Cooperación e Inversión (ACI)
And others…

Credits of the Medellín Resilience Strategy 
Book:

Chief Resilience Officer for Medellín
Santiago Uribe Rocha

Juliana Villabona, Program Manager – City 
Relationships
María Ortíz, Program Manager – City 
Relationships
Lauren N. Sorkin, Platform Director, 100 
Resilient Cities
Marcus Hagberg, Platform Associate, 100 
Resilient Cities
Alvaro Soldevila, Manager, Latin America and 
the Caribbean

Strategic Partners
ACCENTURE
Diego Andrés Florez, Consultant
Laurie Paguio, Consultant 
Malvina Ramírez, Manager
Natalie Co, Senior Manager
Sebastián Rodríguez, Manager
And others...

AECOM 
T. Luke Young, Resilience and Climate Change 
Adaptation Leader
Lina María Puerto, Resilience and Climate 
Change Adaptation Planner
Claire Bonham-Carter, Director of Sustainable 
Development
Melissa Higbee, Sustainability Planner
Aleister Montfort, Sustainable Economics 
Analyst
Will Symons, National Practice Leader, 
Sustainability and Resilience

Graphic Design and Formatting
Gloria Parra, Publicist
Santiago Fernández, Publicist

Photography
Oscar Darío Cardona Álvarez
Archive - Administrative Planning Department 
– Medellín City Hall
Archive - Parque Explora (Science and 
Technology Museum)

Resilient Medellín Team
Laura Vanessa Acevedo Díaz, Knowledge 
Manager
Oscar Darío Cardona Álvarez, Manager of 
Communications 
Paula Andrea Gómez Jiménez, Apprentice - 
Environmental Engineering
Anais Guitard, Exchange Apprentice

Printing
5 Colores Juananbú

Translation
Myriam Camhi Wolf
Syntaxis Global Translations

City Resilience Committee

100RC Team
Ms. Judith Rodin, President of the Rockefeller 
Foundation
Michael Berkowitz, President of 100 Resilient 
Cities
Bryna Lipper, Vice-president of City 
Relationships
Amy Armstrong, Director of City Relationships
Stewart Sarkozy-Banoczy, Main Advisor, 100 
Resilient Cities
Aaron Spencer, Associate Director, City 
Relationships 

Federico Gutiérrez Zuluaga, Mayor of 
Medellín
Santiago Gómez, Government Secretary
Manuel Villa, Private Secretary to the Mayor
Daniela Maturana, President of Medellín
Council
Daniel Carvalho, City Councilman
Camilo Zapata Wills,Director of the 
Administrative Department of Disaster Risk 
Management (Departamento Administrativo 
de Gestíon del Riesgo de Desastres, DAGRD)
Sergio Escobar – Director of Agencia de 
Cooperación e Inversión (ACI)

Adriana Valderrama, Director of Casa de la 
Memoria Museum
Rafael Aubad, President of Proantioquia
Juan Sebastián Bustamante Fernández, 
Technical Coordinator of Urbam – EAFIT
Beatriz Restrepo Gallego, Expert Philosopher 
of the city
Luz Patricia Correa Madrigal, Director of the 
Municipal Victims’ Care and Reparations Unit
Andrés Roldán, Director Parque Explora: 
Science and Technology Museum
Franco Alexander Piza, Director of 
Sustainability - Grupo Bancolombia
Gabriel Pérez, Management Analyst 
Cooperation Sustainability - Grupo 
Bancolombia

ARUP

Resilient Cities of the 100RC Program

Porto Alegre
Rio de Janeiro
Mexico
New Orleans
San Francisco

Special thanks to:

Albie Sachs
Alejandro Echeverri Restrepo
Andrés Felipe Roldán Giraldo
Aníbal Gaviria Correa
Anthony Somerset
Bernardo Ignacio Muñoz Zorzano
Camilo Zapata Wills
Carlos Alberto Gil
Catalina Diaz Escobar
Christopher Eads
Claudia García Loboguerrero
Claudia Restrepo
Daniel Carvalho
Eugenio Prieto
Federico Gutiérrez
Francesco M. Orsini
Gloria Patricia Uribe Neira
Iván Darío Gómez
Ivor Jenkins
Jaime Enrique Gómez
Jorge Pérez Jaramillo
Jorge Mejía Martínez
Juan Diego Quintero
Lucía Gonzales
Luis Fernando Suárez
Luz Patricia Correa Madrigal
Roelf Meyer
Sandra Benítez
Ursula Bianca Baigorria Köppel
And others…

67

References

Domíngez, R., Sanseviero, R., & Vásquez, I. 
(2000). El estado de la paz y la evolución 
de las violencias. La situación de América 
Latina. (C. I. paz, Ed.) Montevideo, Uruguay: 
Ediciones Trilce.

Duque, L. F. (2000). Programa de 
Convivencia Ciudadana de Medellín. Medellín: 
Alcaldía de Medellín.

El Plan de Ordenamiento Territorial, u. p. 
(s.f.). Alcaldía de Medellín. Recuperado el 12 
de Junio de 2015, de
https://www.medellin.gov.co/irj/portal/
nmedellin?NavigationTarget=navurl://474b42
d2a001a412ed3117d306a43135

Explora, P. (2015). Colaboratorio Taller 
Público de Experimentación. Medellín: Fondo 
Medellín, Ciudad para la Vida.

GMH. (2013). ¡BASTA YA! Colombia: 
Memorias de Guerra y Dignidad. Bogotá: 
Imprenta Nacional.

F, L. M., & Jaramillo Salazar, M. (Abril de 
2014). Alcaldía de Medellín. Recuperado el 02 
de Junio de 2016, de
https://www.medellin.gov.co/irj/portal/
ciudadanos?NavigationTarget=navurl://5a93
b7830137319816efb82245eedf3c

López Marcela (2010) Water Distribution as 
an Indicator of Social Inequality: The Case of 
Medellin, Desigualdades.Net, www. hich.vsp.
br/centrodametropoli/artigo/static.

Martínez Guzmán, V. (2001). Jerez. 
Recuperado el 05 de Septiembre de 2015, de 
Ayuntamiento de Jerez: http://www.jerez.es/
fileadmin/Documentos/hombresxigualdad/
fondo_documental/Identidad_masculina/
Roles_masculinos_y_construcci_n_de_una_
cultura_de_paz.pdf

Michel, M., Alarcón G, C., Rincón M, A., Yuri 
G, M., & Christoph G, C. (2014). Ciudades 
en la Encrucijada: Violencia y poder criminal 
en Río de Janeiro, Medellín, bogotá y Ciudad 
Juárez. Medellín: Pregón S.A.S.

Molina R., B., & Muñoz, F. (2004). Manual de 
Paz y conflictos. Madrid, España: Universidad 
de Granada.

Ogley, R. (1999). Conflict Theory, 
Encyclopedia of Violence, Peace and Conflict, 
. New York, Academic Press , I, 401-412.

Planeación, A. D. Mapas. Departamento 
Administrativo de Planeación, Medellín.

Quijano, M., & Consuelo, R. (2013). 
Identificación de Riesgos. Medellín: Fondo 
Editorial Universidad EAFIT.

CENTRO DE ESTUDIOS URBAM UNIVERSIDAD 
EAFIT; HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL OF 
DESIGN SOCIAL AGENCY LAB . (Febrero de 
2012). RE HABITAR LA LADERA SHIFTING 
GROUND. Operaciones en Areas de riesgo y 
asentamiento precario en Medellin. Medellín, 
Antioquia, Colombia.

Resilientes, 100. C. (2016). 100resilientcities. 
Recuperado el 27 de 05 de 2016, de http://
www.100resilientcities.org/page/-/About%20
100%20Resilient%20Cities-%20Spanish.pdf

Resilientes, 100. C. (2016). 100resilientcities. 
Recuperado el 05 de 03 de 2016, de 
http://www.100resilientcities.org/page/-
/100rc/Blue%20City%20Resilience%20
Framework%20Full%20Context%20v1_5.pdf

Resilentes, 1. c. (2016). Acerca de 
nosotros: RESILIENT CITIES. ALL RIGHTS 
RESERVED. Recuperado el 26 de 05 
de 2016, de RESILIENT CITIES: http://
www.100resilientcities.org/resilience#/-_/

Talleres, entrevistas y grupos focales con 
actores Representativos de las Instituciones 
públicas y privadas de Medellín relacionadas 
en la estrategia. (Mayo de 2015 a Mayo 
de 2016). Resiliencia. (S. Uribe Rocha, 
Entrevistador)

Resilient MedellínResilient Medellín