1

RESILIENT VEJLEVISION
Vejle seeks to turn its 
current challenges into 
opportunities. Our ambition 
is to become an innovative 
lighthouse that demonstrates 
how small cities can solve 
big problems and show 
great responsibility. With 
our resilience strategy we 
invite all partners to take 
action and cooperate in the 
development of tomorrow’s 
resilient Vejle - a cohesive, 
robust and sustainable city.

Introduction
Vejle was selected to join the 100 Resilient Cities 
(100RC) global network in 2013. Cities from across 
the world will develop a resilience road map and 
share best practice to tackle the physical, social 
and economic challenges facing the 21st century. 
www.100resilientcities.org

The partnership with 100RC has been a major 
driving force for the development of Vejle’s resilience 
strategy, the first of its kind in Denmark and Europe.

This document introduces the Municipality of Vejle’s 
resilience strategy for 2016-2020. Our resilience 
strategy consists of a range of existing actions and 
new actions, and will support the vision “Vejle – We 
Make it Happen” and the values for co-creation, 
innovation and sustainable growth.

A total of 100 ambitious initiatives were identified 
during the 100RC process through collaboration and 
participation of everyone in the city, 41 of which we 
aim to deliver between 2016 and 2020. The remaining 
initiatives will be developed during this period and 
delivered over a longer time scale. Our actions are 
structured around four strategic pillars, and 12 goals.

The actions in the strategy are owned by the 
City Council and the respective committees and 
administrations. Political backing and funding sources 
are still to be discussed and agreed in the city. 

The resilience strategy, goals and actions will be 
regularly updated and the resilience strategy can be 
followed via www.vejle.dk/resiliens 

Table of Contents | Vejle Resilience Strategy

Mayor’s Letter 
Letter from Michael Berkowitz 
Resilient Vejle Partnerships 

1  Purpose of Vejle’s Resilience Strategy 
 

Introduction to Vejle – Denmark’s Resilience Capital 

2  Vejle’s Strategic Pillars, Goals and Actions 
  Vejle’s Strategic Pillars 
 

 A Co-creating City that prospers through productive  
partnerships across public and private sectors
  A Climate Resilient City that uses water and  
  climate change as drivers for development 
 

 A Socially Resilient City that thrives  
from its cohesive community
 A Smart City that embraces new technologies and  
improves co-creation, efficiency, outreach and inclusivity 

 

3  The Strategy Process 
  Vejle’s Approach to Resilience 
  Development of Vejle’s Resilience Strategy 
  Vejle’s Resilience Diagnostic 
  Responding to our Stresses – Discovering Solutions 
  Governance of the Strategy Development Process  
  Vejle and 100RC 

4  From Strategy to implementation 
 

Implementation and Delivery (2016-2020) 

5  Actions Catalogue (100 initiatives/ actions) 

6  References and Acknowledgements  

6
7
8

12
17

20
20
24 

30 

36 

48 

55
56
58
60
62
63
64

67
69

71

97

Letter from the Mayor
Arne Sigtenbjerggaard

Vejle’s Resilience Strategy – an invitation to cooperate

It is with great pride that the Municipality of Vejle hereby announces its 
Resilience Strategy - the first in Europe.

Vejle is the only city in Scandinavia to be selected as part of the Rockefeller 
Foundation’s 100 Resilient Cities, where they work with cities like Rio de Janeiro, 
Rotterdam, Rome, Durban and New York to develop cities’ adaptability to 
future challenges.

These challenges include the consequences of climate change, as well as the 
implications of social and economic crises. International collaboration helps to 
create more vigorous, robust and forward-looking cities. 

Membership of the 100RC network offers us a fantastic opportunity to 
collaborate with a range of international players with the goal of making Vejle 
a more resilient city. Over the past 3 years, we have focused on identifying 
challenges and opportunities to develop our city into an even better place to 
live for all our citizens.

The resilience strategy focuses on four central development areas, aligning with 
our modern welfare society. These are the Co-creating City, Climate Resilience, 
Social Cohesion and Smart City. Within each area, we have identified a list of 
specific actions, which we will work on carrying out during the coming years – 
hopefully in collaboration with our new international partners. 

In Vejle, we are privileged to have a good starting point. But it is important that 
we continue developing and sharing our experiences with others working to 
develop a resilient city of the future. With the resilience strategy, we are building 
on the City Council’s vision “We Make it Happen”. We are ambitious on behalf 
of Vejle and have a strong will to strengthen the city’s resilience, create a strong 
community and ensure the positive development of our society. 

Vejle seeks to turn its current challenges into opportunities. Our ambition is to 
become an innovative lighthouse that demonstrates how small cities can solve 
big problems and show great responsibility. With our resilience strategy we 
invite all partners to action and cooperate in the development of tomorrow’s 
resilient Vejle - a cohesive, robust and sustainable city.

6

RESILIENT VEJLELetter from the President of 100 Resilient Cities
Michael Berkowitz

100 Resilient Cities – Pioneered by the Rockefeller Foundation, is pleased to 
partner with the Municipality of Vejle to release the first resilience strategy 
in the Scandinavian region, and in Europe. This marks a turning point in an 
extraordinary journey for this incredible Danish city, which continues to build 
its reputation as a global thought-leader and innovator in urban resilience 
ideas and practices.

First and foremost, I’d like to thank the City Council of Vejle and Mayor Arne 
Sigtenbjerggaard for his vision, passion, and dynamic partnership with us over 
the past three years. Jonas Kroustrup, the city’s Chief Resilience Officer, and 
the senior city officials who provided him with extraordinary support, have 
gone above and beyond to produce this visionary document. 

Building city resilience requires recognizing the interplay of a city’s strengths, 
weaknesses, shocks, and stresses. It is also about bolstering the foundation 
of a city so that it can respond to new, unforeseen events, and plan for the 
unknown.  While Vejle is relatively small in terms of its size and population, 
it has proven to be capable of addressing these big challenges, and is an 
inspiration to other cities in its region.

Vejle has put in tremendous efforts to integrate resilience as an organizing 
principle.  At the core of this journey is the city’s proud identity and history 
stretching back to King Bluetooth himself.  Vejle has gone to great lengths 
to demonstrate that it is a place of cutting-edge thinking and innovative 
partnerships, including those with 100RC Platform Partners such as Arcadis,  
a global firm specializing in design, infrastructure and water management. 
Vejle is also at the forefront of demonstrating how the lauded Scandinavian 
model can evolve given the imminent challenges and opportunities at its 
doorstep – whether it be increased immigration, climate change or adapting 
to new technologies.

This strategy, which is the result of many months of research, stakeholder 
engagement, self-assessment, and analysis, looks to identify a tactical road-
map for the future. It identifies a range of goals and concrete initiatives which 
will address the interplay of the city’s challenges and opportunities.

100 Resilient Cities is committed to working with the municipality of Vejle to 
implement the vision laid out in this strategy. With the support of 100RC’s 
Platform of Partners—a powerful cadre of public, private, non-profit, and 
academic organizations—we will bring important resources to this partnership. 
In turn, Vejle will play a critical role in informing the market, spurring on 
development of new tools and services that cities around the world can use to 
build their own resilience.  Once again, congratulations to Vejle! 

7

RESILIENT VEJLEResilient Vejle 
Partnerships 

In Vejle, we believe in co-creation and strong 
partnerships. Our future work on resilience 
will be supported and implemented by our 
existing partnerships with the business sectors, 
education institutions and housing committees. 
It is by joining forces with our partners that we 
aim to build resilience in Vejle. An overview of 
our existing partnerships includes;

The Innovation Committee
” THE INNOVATION COMMITTEE DEVELOPS 
AND TESTS IDEAS THAT CAN FORM THE 
FUTURE OF VEJLE. WE SEE IT AS OUR 
TASK TO CHALLENGE AND HELP THE 
MUNICIPALITY WITH DEVELOPING A 
FORWARD-THINKING, INNOVATIVE AND 
RESILIENT SOCIETY THAT IS ATTRACTIVE 
FOR BOTH THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY 
AND FOR THE CITIZENS. THE RESILIENCE 
STRATEGY POINTS TOWARD A RANGE OF 
OPPORTUNITIES, WHERE THE INNOVATION 
COMMITTEE WILL BE ABLE TO CONTRIBUTE 
BY DEVELOPING SOLUTIONS”
Torben Christensen, administrative director at Good 
Food Group A/S, vice president of The Innovation 
Committee

The Innovation Committee was established in 
2014 as a business policy committee consisting 
of seven business leaders, three representatives 
from the education institutions of Vejle, as well 

as seven politicians from the City Council. The 
work of the Committee is based on the vision 
of the City Council “We Make it Happen”, and 
involves challenging and testing scenarios for 
the future Vejle.

The Business and Education Liaison Committee
” THE COMMITTEE IS IN DIALOGUE WITH THE 
LOCAL BUSINESS COMMUNITY AND THE 
QUALIFYING EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS 
TO DEVELOP RESILIENT SOLUTIONS FOR 
THE SOCIETAL CHALLENGES WE FACE. 
THIS INCLUDES BUT IS NOT RESTRICTED TO 
CLIMATE CHANGE AND SMART CITIES, THE 
COMMITTEE ALSO IDENTIFIES GROWTH 
POTENTIAL FOR THE CITY. VEJLE’S 
MEMBERSHIP OF THE 100RC NETWORK 
WILL FACILITATE ACCESS TO NEW AND 
EXCITING INTERNATIONAL MARKETS.”
Jacob Madsen, Vice President for Danfoss, Chairman 
of the Business and Education Liaision Committee

The Business and Education Liaison Committee 
was established in 2014 and is composed 
broadly of representatives from the business 
sector, educational sector and the City Council. 
The Committee’s work includes maintaining 
and attracting more job opportunities to the 
municipality and strengthening public - private 
collaboration. 

The Innovation Committee. 
Photo: Nils Rosenvold

The Business and Education Liaison Committee. 
Photo: Nils Rosenvold

8

RESILIENT VEJLEHousing Policy Steering Group
” THE HOUSING ASSOCIATIONS ARE ACTIVE 
PARTNERS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF 
THE CITY, AND IN FINDING COMMON 
SOLUTIONS TO THE CHALLENGES OF 
URBANIZATION, CLIMATE CHANGE AND 
FLOODING. RESILIENCE IS A NEW WAY 
TO CREATE VALUE FOR THE ENTIRE CITY 
AND STRENGTHEN ITS COHESION ACROSS 
RESIDENTIAL AREAS THROUGH A BROAD 
JOINT EFFORT”
The social housing organizations in Vejle (AAB, 
ØsterBO, Lejerbo and Domea)

The aim of the Housing Policy Steering Group 
is to advise the housing associations and the 
municipality on housing policy, and integration 
of social housing residential developments. The 
Steering Group sets the policy direction and 
ensures political dialogue.

Council of Education
” THE EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS OF VEJLE 
APPROACH RESILIENCE WITH AN EXCITING 
NEW LEARNING PERSPECTIVE. WE WORK 
CLOSELY WITH THE MUNICIPALITY OF 
VEJLE AND THE BUSINESSES OF THE AREA 
TO DEVELOP THE EDUCATION OF THE 
FUTURE AND PREPARE OUR STUDENTS 
TO MANAGE A TECHNOLOGICALLY AND 
SOCIALLY CHANGING SOCIETY.”
Erik Knudsen, principle for University College 
Lillebælt, member of the Council of Education

The Municipality of Vejle and the educational 
institutions in Vejle have been collaborating with 
the Council of Education for many years. Our 
aim is to jointly develop Vejle as an attractive 
city for education and ensure that all young 
people have the best possible opportunity for 
completing a high quality education.

Some of the institutions we are in dialogue 
with include Rødkilde Gymnasium, Rosborg 
Gymnasium & HF, Southern Denmark Technical 
College (SDTC), Campus Vejle, School of 
social health, Business Academy Lillebælt and 
University College Lillebælt.

Through the Partnership the Municipality of Vejle will 
invite stakeholders to participate in building resilience 
capacity for the city. Photo: The Municipality of Vejle

9

RESILIENT VEJLE” WITH THE RESILIENCE 
STRATEGY WE ARE 
CONSTRUCTING THE 
FOUNDATION FOR THE COMING 
GENERATIONS AND SECURING 
A CITY AND SOCIETY THAT 
IS PREPARED FOR WHAT 
TOMORROW BRINGS”

Jonas Kroustrup, Chief Resilience Officer

PURPOSE OF VEJLE’S  
RESILIENCE STRATEGY

1

Photo: VejleMuseerne

Purpose of Vejle’s  
resilience strategy
Vejle’s resilience strategy will strengthen the 
foundation of our city during both good and 
bad times. Our work on resilience is across the 
municipality, civil societies and the business 
community, to enhance our capacity and 
jointly turn challenges into new opportunities. 
It is also by joining forces with our existing and 
newly established partnerships that we aim to 
build resilience in Vejle.

What is urban resilience?
” URBAN RESILIENCE IS THE CAPACITY 
OF INDIVIDUALS, COMMUNITIES, 
INSTITUTIONS, BUSINESSES, AND SYSTEMS 
WITHIN A CITY TO SURVIVE, ADAPT, AND 
GROW NO MATTER WHAT KINDS OF 
CHRONIC STRESSES AND ACUTE SHOCKS 
THEY EXPERIENCE.” ”
100 Resilient Cities

We act on new challenges to create 
opportunities 
Vejle is responding to the city’s needs through 
an increase in housing provision and economic 
growth, but the city needs to do more in light 
of its challenges. Recently, we have begun 
to witness the potential consequences of 
climate change, globalization, immigration 
and population growth – challenges, which 
to a large extent will affect the welfare of our 
society, and our future.  

Some of our core challenges

•  Climate change and flood risk will 
have physical, social and economic 
consequences

•  Urbanization will have an impact on 

quality of life and put pressure on 
infrastructure, both within Vejle and 
regionally

•  Infrastructure Demand will create a 

need for new smart, safe and inclusive 
infrastructure development, covering 
physical as well as digital

•  Changing industries, global economy 

and new technology will create a 
turbulent job market and introduce 
vulnerable employment conditions

•  Demographic changes in society will 
require innovative initiatives to ensure 
community cohesion and maintain an 
equitable society

12

RESILIENT VEJLEResilience creates value
Our long term effort for a resilient Vejle will 
not only contribute to minimizing the risks and 
costs, but it will also create stability and safety; 
increase our welfare conditions, our spirit of 
entrepreneurship, and our investments and 
business development opportunities.

Vejle’s participation in 100 Resilient Cities 
is a unique opportunity to collaborate with 
international networks and gain access 
to new knowledge. At the same time, 100 
Resilient Cities will in the long term become 
a source for resilience building solutions for 
cities, which will create opportunities for 
businesses, both in Vejle and in the rest of 
Denmark. Through the resilience strategy, we 
set a foundation for our young generations to 
ensure a city and a society that is prepared for 
the future.

We have identified the challenges, but not yet 
their long term implications. The resilience 
strategy focuses particularly on the climatic, 
economic and social challenges which 
are putting our city under pressure. These 
challenges need to be addressed through 
new partnerships, and innovative approaches. 
It will require us to work together, and 
collaborate across organizations – both now 
and in the future. We call this resilience through 
co-creation.

Through the resilience strategy, we wish to 
consider the following:

•  How do we ensure that the children 

and youth of tomorrow, including 
vulnerable people and immigrants 
have the best conditions to meet a 
new reality?

•  How can Vejle strengthen its 

foundation for sustainable growth 
and development turning its future 
challenges into new opportunities?

•  How can Vejle continue to be an 
inclusive, safe and secure society 
despite social and demographical 
changes?

•  How can we create an attractive city 

environment while simultaneously 
protecting Vejle from climate change?
•  How can Vejle keep up with regional 

urbanization, changing industries, 
new technology and global economies?

•  How do we collaborate to make Vejle 

the resilient city of tomorrow and 
secure a prosperous future?

13

RESILIENT VEJLEVestbyen

Rosborg

Løget

Vejle

Vejle is a good example of a medium sized 
Scandinavian city and municipality. 

With its 111,000 inhabitants, Vejle is the  
6th largest municipality in Denmark. 

The city itself is the 9th largest with  
54,000 citizens. 

The municipality has a stable economy and 
experiences positive growth and development.

14

RESILIENT VEJLENørremarken

Østbyen

Vejle Fjord

Photo: ©COWI, DDO® 2014

15

RESILIENT VEJLE In Vejle, we want to build resilience by focusing on the development of collaboration at both the municipal and local scale. We will build scenarios around the challenges affecting our citizens and businesses.Photo: Nils Rosenvold

Photo: TREFOR

Photo: TREFOR

16

RESILIENT VEJLEIntroduction to Vejle
THE RESILIENCE CAPITAL OF DENMARK 

Vejle – a modern city
Today we are poised to make a big leap and a decisive step in the city’s history - we are 
well on our way to becoming a larger and more modern city.

Origin of Vejle: Water as an asset
The name Vejle comes from the ancient Danish 
word ‘wæthel’ which means fjord. Vejle has 
always seen water as an asset, and forms part 
of its history and identity. The first settlements, 
dating back to the 12th century, were built in the 
middle of Vejle Stream Valley where the Grejs 
Stream meets Vejle River, just as it runs into the 
fjord. Since the first settlements, the water has 
been the symbol of life in Vejle. 

Setting of Vejle: Water and the city
Vejle’s beautiful location between Vejle Stream 
Fjord and Vejle Valley creates opportunities to 
use nature to create an attractive city. In the 
centre of Vejle two valleys meet; Vejle Stream 
Valley from the west - Denmark’s longest Tunnel 
Valley, and the Grejs Valley from the North - the 
largest gorge in Denmark. 

Economy and business 
Industry and manufacturing still characterize 
Vejle today. However in recent decades a 
number of creative businesses and IT companies 
are emerging, many of which are located in 
‘The Spinning Mill’, one of Denmark’s largest 
development and innovation environments. 
Today, Vejle serves as a logistical centre in 
Denmark and forms part of largest regional 
collaboration – The Triangle region.

Integration
In 2012 Vejle was announced as the Best 
Municipality for Integration in Denmark, and is 
currently considered as an exemplar municipality 
for welcoming refugees. 

Innovation in Vejle 
Vejle is amongst the first cities in Denmark to 
implement innovation as a strategy across all 
its administrations.

Sustainability 
Vejle has a long and proud tradition of 
sustainable practices. Sustainable growth is a 
term central to the City Council’s vision ‘Vejle - 
We Make it Happen’. 

Vejle – the digital provincial city 
The Municipality of Vejle is at the forefront 
of the development of smart-city solutions 
in Denmark. This development was driven 
initially by the needs of our citizens, businesses 
and organizations.

City development in Vejle 
Vejle was the first municipality in Denmark to 
implement an architecture policy. In recent 
years the city has undertaken extensive urban 
development.

” VEJLE IS A SMALL 
PLACE WHERE BIG 
THINGS HAPPEN” 

Vikram Singh, 100 Resilient Cities

17

RESILIENT VEJLEA Co-creating City

We will create tomorrow’s resilient city through productive 
partnerships across public and private sectors.

A Climate Resilient City

We will use water and climate change as drivers for 
development of the city.

A Socially Resilient City

We will increase social and economic cohesion and create  
the best conditions for future generations.

A Smart City

We will embrace new technologies and improve  
co-creation, efficiency, outreach and inclusivity.

OUR STRATEGIC PILLARS,  

GOALS AND ACTIONS

2

Vejle’s Strategic Pillars
Our resilience strategy is framed around four strategic pillars, 12 goals and 100 actions.  
This section includes the actions that we will develop and launch between 2016 and 2020.  
Each pillar is further defined by a number of goals.

 1. A Co-creating City 

 
 
We will create tomorrow’s resilient city 
through productive partnerships across  
public and private sectors.
Goals: 
1.1  We will make resilience central to the 

Municipality’s vision and plans 

1.2 We will use co-creation to build resilience 

capacity 

1.3 We will develop innovative resilient city 

solutions and scale up best practices 

In Denmark, we have a long tradition of 
co-creation; collaboration between public 
and private institutions, businesses, and 
communities in the city to address challenges. 
We want to ensure that the concept continues 
to be a key aspiration for resilience and 
resilience building actions.

Co-creation is a cross-cutting pillar that 
integrates across all the other pillars. We 
will focus on developing, integrating and 
implementing resilience across the various 
sectors and departments in the municipality 
to continue to improve our public-private 
innovation work.

We want to work with those who have the drive 
and desire for action – be it locally, regionally, 
nationally or internationally. In our co-creative 
city we will primarily focus on integrating 
resilience into our municipal strategies.

 2.  A Climate  

Resilient City 

We will use water and climate change as 
drivers for development of the city. 
Goals: 
2.1 We will protect Vejle and turn the water 
into an asset for urban and social capital 

2.2 We will establish public-private 
partnerships for resilient utilities

2.3 We will secure growth by using sustainable 

resources, renewable energy and green 
transport

Water in Vejle is both an asset and a challenge. 
Vejle city is designated as one of ten Danish 
risk areas where there is a significant flood risk 
due to rising sea levels, increasing rainfall and 
flooding. There are several large key physical 
assets in Vejle. All are well maintained and 
monitored but it is also apparent that there is a 
need to address the coming risk in relation to 
flooding and increase in rain, as this will pose a 
serious treat in future years. 

Our assets are vulnerable to climate change, this 
includes the harbour, the coastal area, the urban 
core and some of our infrastructure (small 
bridges and tunnels in west side urban core). 
Our water and sewage system are not prepared 
for heavy rain and flooding, some of the energy 
transformer stations and communication 
infrastructure in the city are also vulnerable to 
flooding.  Today, we have a well-functioning 
emergency response capability, as well as 
climate and risk management action plans but 
we need to explore new innovative solutions 
that create attractive urban environments while 
protecting us from the potential risks associated 
with increased water. 

20

RESILIENT VEJLE 3.  A Socially  

Resilient City 

 4. A Smart City 

 

We will increase social and economic 
cohesion and create the best conditions for 
future generations.
Goals: 
3.1 We will strengthen social resilience across 
the municipality together with our citizens 
and businesses 

3.2 We will  make urban spaces and social 
housing central to community cohesion

3.3 We will invest in Vejle’s youth

We will embrace new technologies and 
improve co-creation, efficiency, outreach 
and inclusivity.
Goals:
4.1 We will use Smart technologies to create 

an efficient society 

4.2 We will support youth education in digital 

technologies

4.3 We will facilitate public access to open 
data towards creating a digital society

The strategy process has identified a number of 
emerging social challenges that can adversely 
affect the quality of life and welfare in Vejle 
today and in the future. Our diagnostic analysis 
suggests an increased risk of polarization, which 
can happen to more vulnerable groups at a 
time of increased immigration. Furthermore, the 
diagnostic work also raised a concern about the 
challenges facing the youth of Vejle. It indicated 
a widening gap and loss of social cohesion 
between groups in society across economic 
status, culture and local identity.  The diagnostic 
work took a holistic approach to the perception 
of social services and welfare in Danish society, 
and reviewed the existing initiatives from five 
different perspectives (strategic; geographical; 
thematic; methodological perspectives; whilst 
also considering the different target groups). 

The principles of social resilience focus on 
reinforcing the societal shift from compensation 
thinking to resource building. This shift is under 
way in Vejle. However, the strong Danish welfare 
model is under economic and demographic 
pressures and the role of municipalities is 
changing. The public sector will no longer be 
a welfare services enterprise, but rather will 
function as a democratically run community 
of active, responsible and resourceful citizens, 
businesses and institutions. This is partly about 
delivering better and smarter services - and 
promoting a municipality that is robust and 
durable, not only economically but also socially.

New technologies, better collection and use 
of data, and automation will help us generate 
efficient and innovative ways of addressing 
a variety of challenges around both climate 
change, urban development and economic 
growth whilst also improving our social 
resilience. Digital technologies provide a major 
innovation potential and an opportunity to 
make Vejle even more attractive. Our ambition 
is to make Vejle a Resilient Smart City - a city 
that acts intelligently in creating opportunities 
and in responding to shocks and stresses.  
A Resilient Smart City that is safe from cyber-
attacks; digitally inclusive; trustworthy in its use 
of data; and has a strong and well-functioning 
digital infrastructure.

Section 5 includes the list of our 100 initiatives 
and actions. Our feature goals and actions are 
presented in full later in this chapter.

21

RESILIENT VEJLECriteria for Vejle’s Strategic Pillars

Focus on challenges and 
imbalances – especially ‘wicked’ 
problems and vulnerable citizens

Use sustainable resource strategies 
– socially, economically and 
environmentally 

Integrate across the public  
sector and include citizens  
and businesses

Address global challenges and 
share solutions with other cities

Lead to local impact, for  
example more jobs or increased 
quality of welfare

Demonstrate novelty  
and innovation

Strategy terminology
Strategic pillar: is a strategic direction to 
deliver the City’s Resilience Vision

Goal: is a tangible and attainable objective 
for the strategy

Lighthouse Action (Priority Action):  
An action that is a priority to Vejle’s 
resilience, which we will work with 
supporters to implement

Supporting Action: is an action that 
supports a Lighthouse action or which in 
itself is important for Vejle’s resilience

Initiative: Projects, plans and ideas that will 
support Vejle’s resilience development

 A Co-creating City

 A Climate Resilient City

A Socially Resilient City

A Smart City

Timeframe
Ongoing: An action or initiative that 
is already underway in the city and 
contributing to Vejle’s resilience, which will 
continue to be taken forward

Short: Delivered within 2 years
Medium: Delivered within 2-5 years
Long term: Delivered beyond 5 years

22

RESILIENT VEJLEActions

1.  A Co-creating 

City

2.  A Climate 

Resilient City

Preventive Healthcare Strategy

Rosborg

Strengthen Cohesion

Fjordbyen Vejle

Co-creating Strategy

Youth Life

Mobility

Vejle 2050

Vestbyen

Resilience Lab Denmark

Digital inclusion

Social Resilience Policy

Social Housing Plans

Smart LED

Digital resiliens

4. A Smart City

3.  A Socially 

resilient City

Strategic Pillars

2.  A Climate 

Resilient City

3.  A Socially 

Resilient City

1.  A Co-creating 

City

4. A Smart City

The initiatives within the Strategic Pillars have 
different characteristics and can be categorized as 
amongst other things:

•  Integrating resilience into new visions, policies and 

strategies for Vejle’s development.

•  Introducing new methods of strategic thinking and 

planning to incorporate resilience.

•  Rethinking existing efforts and using resilience as a 

holistic and dynamic approach.

•  Some new initiatives have been derived directly 
from the strategy process, others are initiatives 
that are already under development , but have 
been revisited and further developed to increase 
their resilience value through the strategy process.

•  The time frame is short, medium or long term.

23

RESILIENT VEJLEVEJLE 2050

“ THE PROVINCIAL CITY VEJLE, HAS DECIDED 
TO BECOME A GLOBAL FRONT RUNNER. 
THE CITY WANTS TO BE A LIGHTHOUSE FOR 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF RESILIENCE – THE 
ABILITY TO REMAIN TRUE TO ONE’S SELF IN 
THE MIDDLE OF A WORLD OF CHANGE.” 
Tor Nørretranders, From the newsmagazine ‘Føljeton’

24

Photo: Nils Rosenvold

RESILIENT VEJLEVEJLE 2050
Integrate resilience into the development of vision ‘Vejle 
2050’ and into the municipal development plans

Description: The collective vision ‘Vejle – We 
Make it Happen’ has set ambitious targets for Vejle’s 
development. The vision sets Vejle as a leader in 
attracting people and businesses, creating first class 
learning environments and in providing good welfare 
services. In light of the potential shocks and chronic 
stresses facing our city, such as urbanization, climate 
change and immigration, we need to make resilience 
central to our local development plans. We will work 
with local business, housing organizations, and 
education institutions to address the challenges and 
identify opportunities in Vejle to collectively incorporate 
resilience into the upcoming municipal plan and support 
long term planning of the city. We will develop a plan for 
cooperation between the municipality, the educational 
institutions and the business sector in 2016. 

Objective: To work collaboratively across public 
and private institutions to address our challenges and 
make resilience central to municipal plans. This includes 
demographic, residential and societal changes that 
technological advancements will bring. Resilience will 
be incorporated into the forthcoming municipal plan, 
to secure full integration of future city plans and city 
development plans. 

Action owner: Vejle Kommune - 
Kommunaldirektørens stabe, Velfærdsforvaltningen, 
Børne- og Ungeforvaltningen, Økonomi-, 
Arbejdsmarkeds- & Sundhedsforvaltningen, Teknik & 
Miljø, Kultur & Fritid

Timeframe: Medium-term
Resilience value: The effect will be a visionary and 
progressive development of Vejle city, which will allow 
us to consider challenges before they occur. The project 
will create the foundation for collaboration with 100 RC 
platform partners and knowledge institution. 
•  Work with various city stakeholders towards 

securing long term integrated planning

•  Promote economic growth and prosperity
•  Increase cohesive and equitable communities

Goals 1.1 : 
We will make 
resilience central to 
the Municipality’s 
vision and plans

Supporting Action 1.1.B:   
Establish a Resilient Vejle Committee 
Description: The Municipality of Vejle will partner 
with housing, business and educational organizations 
to establish a ’Resilient Vejle’ committee responsible 
for monitoring the implementation of the strategy, 
coordinating the actions across the different 
stakeholders, and raising any new challenges.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Short to Long-term
Resilience Value:
•  Cross disciplinary collaboration 
•  Sharing of knowledge across different sectors
•  Multiple benefits of actions

Supporting Action 1.1.C:  
Develop a new education strategy 
Description: In 2016, Municipality of Vejle will 
collaborate with the Board of Education to develop 
a plan that positions Vejle as an education hub. The 
municipality and the city’s educational institution will 
collaborate on developing strong educational offers 
that are widely and inclusively available, and benefit 
the most vulnerable groups as well as the most 
talented.  
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Short-term
Resilience Value:
•  Increased social cohesion
•  Collaboration across public and private sector
•  Multiple benefits of actions

25

RESILIENT VEJLECO-CREATION STRATEGY

26

RESILIENT VEJLECO-CREATION STRATEGY
Deliver an action plan for co-creation between 
citizens, businesses, unions and institutions

Description: Vejle wants to be a resilient and 
collaborative council. A municipality that together with 
its citizens and the entire city creates common and 
better welfare services for all citizens. This will require 
collaboration with stakeholders and organizations from 
outside the municipality. Co-creation is an approach 
that has achieved widespread popularity for the City 
Council’s strategic work in recent years. We need to 
nurture and develop this concept collaboratively with 
the engagement and interest of our stakeholders. 
The co-creation strategy will set the direction that 
the municipality will take to plan for and address the 
challenges of potential shocks and chronic stresses in 
the future. We will develop a methodology and action 
plan to enhance the quality of our welfare services 
without increasing in public spending. We will address 
the challenges together with our citizens and partners 
outside the municipality.

Objective: To support all types of co-creation across 
The Municipality of Vejle. This will improve the quality 
of life of the citizens through clarity of the concept, 
principles and rules of co-creation.

Action owner: Municipality of Vejle. Office of the 
Chief Executive , Welfare Administration, Children and 
Youth Administration, Economy- Labor market and 
Health Administration, Technical & Environment, Culture 
& Leisure.

Timeframe: Medium-term
Resilience value: The resilience strategy and 
indeed co-creation in general, is perceived as the 
optimum approach for developing organizational 
capacity for resilience.

•   Improving quality of life through the provision 

of strong and robust welfare services

•  Creating equitable and cohesive communities
•  Increased welfare through developing 

and delivering ‘bottom-up’ ideas

Goals 1.2: 
We will use co-
creation to build 
resilience capacity

Supporting Action 1.2.B:   
The Welfare Laboratory 
Description: The Welfare Laboratory is part of the 10 
innovation objectives of the Welfare Administration 
in 2015-2016, a strategic innovation initiative that 
identifies new methods, technologies and solutions 
to the challenges of the 21st century. It is targeted at 
people experiencing severe physical disability, mostly 
living in assisted living facilities. A selected panel 
of experts from the city will collaborate to identify 
holistic solutions to improve welfare standards and to 
build their resilience to potential shocks or stresses. 
Co-creation is a significant element of the Welfare 
Laboratory ethos.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Medium-term
Resilience Value: Cross disciplinary collaboration to 
minimize human vulnerabilities

Supporting Action 1.2.C:  
Resilience Art Festival 
Description: We will promote active citizenship by 
organizing an art festival in 2017 where the arts will 
be used to examine, explore and demonstrate the 
resilience of Vejle. Activities could include ‘Imagining 
Rosborg in 2050’, or ‘a vision for Vejle 2050’ amongst 
other ideas.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Medium-term
Resilience Value:
•  Promote social cohesion, social 

networks and integration

•  Creative community engagement 
through visualizing challenges and 
identifying opportunities with artists

•  Community engagement that strengthens 

cultural and social identity

27

RESILIENT VEJLEROSBORG

City Council  - workshop in the Rosborg area.

28

RESILIENT VEJLEROSBORG
Use Rosborg as a laboratory to address the challenges 
and opportunities that Vejle will face in 2050

Description: Vejle will need to find solutions to 
a number of potential shocks and chronic stresses, 
including climate change, urbanization, demographic 
changes, digital development, etc. We will use Rosborg 
district to develop and test innovative solutions, share 
lessons learnt, and scale up best practices across Vejle. 
Rosborg covers an area of 80 hectares and is expected 
to be completed by 2040-2050.

Objective: To explore innovative solutions to address 
the potential shocks and chronic stresses facing the city 
and to share these globally with other cities. Rosborg 
will function as a ‘test-area’ and contribute to leading the 
way in resilient city planning. We want to explore what 
creates ‘the good life’.

Action owner: Municipality of Vejle. Technical & 
Environment Department, Office of the Chief Executive.

Timeframe: Long-term
Resilience value: The project will contribute 
insight into the methodology for developing greenfield 
and derelict land around cities, helping to solve global 
challenges arising from increasing urbanization.

•  Use innovation to address challenges 

and foster long term planning

•  Share best practice knowledge within 
Vejle, and potentially within Denmark 

•  Potentially generating new jobs and economic growth

Goals 1.3: 
We will develop 
innovative resilient 
city solutions 
and scale up best 
practices

Supporting Action 1.3.B:   
Hold a resilience exhibition in Bylaboratoriet 
Description: We will hold an exhibition for schools 
and investors to showcase the resilience journey 
underway as part of the 100RC program, including 
the development of the key strategic pillars, goals 
and actions. The aim of the exhibition is to initiate 
dialogue on delivering the actions, and to identify 
additional resilience building ideas that could be 
implemented in Rosborg.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Short-term
Resilience Value:
•  Share knowledge with stakeholders within the city
•  Community engagement around the 

future of Vejle and Rosborg

City Council member 
Peder Hummelmose, 
Chairman for the 
Technical Committee 
in the Municipality of 
Vejle. Discussing the 
development of Rosborg 
with students from Aarhus 
School of Architecture.

29

RESILIENT VEJLEFJORDBYEN VEJLE

Photo: Nils Rosenvold.

30

RESILIENT VEJLEFJORDBYEN
Use ‘Fjordbyen’ as a laboratory for climate 
change adaptation and flood control

Description: Vejle’s assets and communities are 
threatened by flooding from the fjord. The city’s edges 
should be safe and protected during storms and rising 
water levels. We want to use ‘Fjordbyen’ as a laboratory 
to improve water management by exploring innovative 
and integrated solutions such as retrofitting new public 
spaces. Our aim is to encourage economic growth whilst 
reducing risk. This action will also be included in the City 
Development Plan. We will reduce the risk of flooding by 
taking the following measures;

•  Design flood defenses to encourage investment, 

development and real estate value

•  Use Østbykvarteret as a demonstration area 
where flood management interventions have 
a recreational and community value.

•  Protect the hinterland areas of the Grejs River 

by installing integrated flood solutions along the 
road infrastructure to decrease the waterflow

Objective: Improve living with, and alongside water, 
to promote economic growth whilst simultaneously 
reducing flood risk.

Action owner: Municipality of Vejle: Technical & 
Environment Department, Office of the Chief Executive.

Timeframe: Long-term
Resilience value: We will engage with 
stakeholders, experts and citizens to promote inclusive 
design through community engagement. 

•  Protect and minimize risks to 

vulnerable assets within the city

•  Adapt to impacts of a changing climate 
•  Build infrastructure with multiple 

benefits for the community

Facts:
By 2050 
•  Water level in the fjord: + 25 cm
•  100 year storm: + 200 cm 
By 2100
•  Water level in the fjord: +69 cm
•  100 year storm: + 244 cm

Source: The Governments mapping 
of dangers and risks of flooding

Goals 2.1: 
We will protect Vejle 
and turn our water 
into an asset to 
improve our urban 
and social capital

Supporting Action 2.1.B:  
Smart Water Vejle 
Description: We want to design and install a sluice 
and water distribution system, to minimize the risk 
of flooding along the Grejs River and control the 
water levels.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle, Technical and 
Environmental Department
Timeframe: Medium to Long-term
Resilience Value:
•  Protect and minimize risk to vulnerable city assets
•  Empowering community by 

collaboratively installing the sluice

•  Potentially generating jobs

Supporting Action 2.1.C:  
Host a Vild med Vand ’Into the Water’ 2.0 event
Description: Vild med Vand is an annual summer 
event to bring communities together in the new town 
of Vejle Fjord. The city is transformed with a series of 
activities to suit everyone’s interests, including water 
sports, fashion shows, music, art, and architecture..
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle, 
Culture Administration
Timeframe: Ongoing
Resilience Value:
•  Create greater awareness and appreciation 

of natural and physical assets in the city

•  Promote community cohesion
•  Engage communities with the organization 

and operations of the event

•  Strengthen the sense of identity within the city
•  Promote economic growth

31

RESILIENT VEJLERESILIENCE LAB DENMARK

“ WE ARE NOW WELL ON THE WAY TO 
SOLVING SOME OF THE CHALLENGES THAT 
THE ‘WILD’ WATER AND WEATHER CAUSE. 
BUT IT IS HARD WORK, COLLABORATION 
BETWEEN THE UTILITIES AND THE 
MUNICIPALITY WILL BE THE KEY TO 
SECURING ROBUST AND RESILIENT 
SOLUTIONS - BUT WE NEED TO SOLVE THIS 
ONE STEP AT A TIME.”
Director Mikael Schultz, Wastewater Vejle A/S

Illustration: CrossMind Reklamebureau

32

RESILIENT VEJLERESILIENCE LAB DENMARK
Set up public private partnerships to generate simulations 
of the potential energy water and data challenges in Vejle in 
2050, and leverage existing knowledge to identify solutions

Description: Resilience Lab Denmark is an 
innovative partnership for energy, water and data. Vejle 
will serve as a demonstration city where simulations 
and solutions to the challenges are implemented. The 
immediate action will be to generate simulations for 
optimizing energy and water supplies to Vejle whilst 
reducing environmental impacts.

Objective: To strengthen and coordinate the 
innovative projects around energy, water and data. 
The partnership will gather knowledge and share this 
with other 100RC network cities to grow an integrated 
resource library.

Action owner: Resilience Lab Denmark is a 
quatro helix collaboration of the Green Tech Center, 
VIA University College, The Municipality of Vejle, Vejle 
Wastewater and TREFOR. 

Timeframe: Medium-term
Resilience value: A coordinated partnership 
and approach to develop solutions for cities that are 
increasingly resource demanding.

•  Develop new ways of improving security 

of supply, and reduce vulnerability 

•  Use the challenge to generate 

opportunities with multiple benefits 

•  Build infrastructure with multiple 

benefits for the community

CEO Jørgen Andersen, 
Green Tech Center   

” RESILIENCE LAB DENMARK AND THE RESILIENCE 
HOUSE WILL BECOME HUBS FOR RESILIENT CITY 
SOLUTIONS ACROSS THE WORLD. A HUB FOR 
KNOWLEDGE INSTITUTIONS, BUSINESSES AND 
GOVERNMENTS, WHOM IN A MULTIDISCIPLINARY 
COLLABORATION WILL DEVELOP INNOVATIVE 
SOLUTIONS THAT CAN RESIST CLIMATE CHANGE.”

Goals 2.2:
We will establish public-
private partnerships for 
resilient utilities

Supporting Action 2.2.B: 
Create the Vejle Resilience House
Description: The 100RC activities have influenced the 
Green Tech Center to develop a new ’Resilience House’. 
It will attract organizations focused on urban resilience 
topics (climate change, water, urban developments) 
to work together to address our resilience challenges, 
identify solutions and apply them in Vejle.
Action owner: Green Tech Center
Timeframe: Short-term
Resilience Value:
•  Generate innovative resilience solutions that 

foster long term planning of the city

•  Share knowledge across Vejle, Denmark 

and internationally across 100RC cities

•  Generate jobs and attract talent 

and expertise into Vejle

Supporting Action 2.2.C:  
Develop a holistic strategic wastewater plan for Vejle
Description: The Municipality of Vejle is one of few 
municipalities developing a holistic wastewater 
strategy that addresses the challenges of climate 
change, water supply, existing municipal water plans, 
and water quality. We want to pioneer this integrated 
approach and set a benchmark for other cities. The 
plan will review the current systems and identify 
where further investment is needed to secure a fit-for-
purpose and resilient wastewater system for Vejle.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Short-term
Resilience Value:
•  Provide robust and resourceful infrastructure
•  Promote a healthy environment for the community
•  Engage the community in the planning and 

maintenance of the city’s infrastructure

•  Share knowledge with other 

municipalities and global cities

•  Generate jobs and economic growth

33

RESILIENT VEJLEMOBILITY

34

RESILIENT VEJLEMOBILITY
Reduce traffic congestion by planning a ‘cycle 
super-highway’ through central Vejle

Description:  Municipality of Vejle will plan a super 
cycle highway across central Vejle to reduce the current 
reliance on cars, reduce traffic congestion, decrease CO2 
emissions, and improve the health and wellbeing of our 
citizens. We will also explore opportunities to improve 
the cycling facilities throughout the city.

Objective: To develop a ‘cycle super-highway’ to 
connect people to important destinations such as the 
railway station, and across neighborhoods (Fjord City in 
the west and Rosborg). 

Action owner: Municipality of Vejle: Technical & 
Environment Department in collaboration with the 
Danish Cyclist Association.

Timeframe: Short-term
Resilience value: Promote the health and 
wellbeing of communities in Vejle and reduce congestion 
in central parts of the city. 

•  Encourage green modes of transport to contribute  

to a cleaner environment

•  Connect communities and neighborhoods  

across the city

•  Reduce time lost in traffic congestion and lengthy 

commutes

Facts:
Exploring the use of 
autonomous vehicles 
will secure an additional 
2,000 cycle trips in the 
city annually.

Societal Cost:
+ 1.63 DKK/km for bicycles
– 0.69 DKK/km for cars

Goals 2.3:
We will secure 
growth by using 
sustainable resources, 
renewable energy 
and green transport

Supporting Action 2.3.B: 
Explore the use of autonomous vehicles
Description: We want to explore opportunities and 
technologies for autonomous vehicles by leveraging the 
knowledge and innovation within Vejle and Denmark. 
The aim is to ease traffic congestion, reduce energy 
consumption and decrease emissions in the city.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Medium-term
Resilience Value:
•  Potential health and wellbeing 

benefits to the community

•  Contributes to a cleaner environment
•  Potential integration with wider smart 

technologies within the city

Supporting Action 2.3.C:  
Achieve energy neutral waste collection trucks
Description: We will invest in converting waste to 
biofuels to run our waste collection trucks to reduce 
C02 emissions and energy consumption within 
Vejle, and move towards the use of more green 
energy. If successful, we aim to convert our bus fleet 
into biofuels.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Medium to long-term
Resilience Value:
•  Contribute to clean environment 

and zero waste energy 

•  Generate jobs within the renewable energy sector

35

RESILIENT VEJLESOCIAL RESILIENCE POLICY

Photo: Torsten Frøstrup

36

RESILIENT VEJLESOCIAL RESILIENCE POLICY

We will increase social and economic cohesion and create 
the best conditions for future generations. 

Description: The municipality’s administration 
departments currently have individual strategies, 
norms, rules and values. When a citizen experiences a 
problem that requires support from the municipality in 
which a number of administrations need to be involved, 
the coordination of efforts can be complex and often 
confusing for those involved. The development of this 
policy recognizes that a requirement for common 
practices and approaches is needed.

Objective: To facilitate and participate in the 
development of a social resilience policy that aims to 
create a cross-department set of values and welfare 
solutions that will bring a fundamental change to 
the system. The main focus will be the change from 
a compensation based approach to an approach 
where citizens are encouraged to make the changes 
themselves with the support of the municipality and the 
public services.

Action owner: Municipality of Vejle: Welfare 
Administration, Children and Youth Administration, and 
Economy- Labor market and Health Administration.

Timeframe: Short-term
Resilience value: People, organizations and 
associations need to be able to take action themselves, 
rather than action being taken on their behalf. We 
want to collaboratively identify and take action with 
our citizens.

•  Contribute to effective management 

and leadership in the city

•  Work collaboratively to improve the 

quality of life for Vejle citizens

•  Prevent social polarization

” WE SHALL NOT ONLY HAVE PRAGMATIC 
SOLUTION BASED DIALOGUES – BUT ALSO 
DIALOGUES THAT FOCUS ON WHAT WE LOVE 
AND WHAT WE SEE AS THE WONDERFUL AND 
INSPIRING THINGS IN OUR LIVES. THE BIGGEST 
THREATS AGAINST RESILIENCE ARE A LACK OF 
DIALOGUE ABOUT, AND VISION FOR WHAT A 
MEANINGFUL LIFE IS; A LACK OF LEADERSHIP 
AND PEOPLE WHO DARE; A LACK OF COMMUNITY 
ON WHAT WE DESIRE AND LONG FOR.”
Finn Thorbjørn Hansen, Professor of Philosophy, 
Aalborg University and manager of the research project 
“Contemplation-driven innovation in The Municipality of Vejle”

Goals 3.1:
We will strengthen 
social resilience in 
Vejle in collaboration 
with our citizens and 
businesses

Supporting Action 3.1.B: 
‘Who controls the orchestra?’ pilot project
Description: ’Who Controls the orchestra’ is an 
interdisciplinary educational pilot project in collaboration 
with the police, addressed at primary school teachers, 
SSP employees, nurses, workers, young consultants, 
and professional social counselors in Vejle. It seeks 
to establish a common methodology for early crime 
prevention and identification of suspicious behaviors.
Action owner: SSP, Children and Youth Administration
Timeframe: Short-term
Resilience Value:
•  Work collaboratively to ensure a safe 

and secure urban environment

•  Engage community and empower stakeholders 
to participate in making the city safe and secure

•  Strengthen social cohesion and social 

identify for young citizens

Supporting Action 3.1.C:  
The ‘Master of one’s life’ program
Description: The program allows citizens and public 
employees to find new approaches to helping 
people with disabilities to better achieve their own 
goals, champion a greater share of their own life, 
and become more active citizens contributing to the 
development of society.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle, 
Welfare Administration
Timeframe: Short-term
Resilience Value:
•  Empower the community to help vulnerable groups
•  Establish social networks
•  Promote inclusivity amongst the vulnerable groups

37

RESILIENT VEJLEWEST CITY

38

RESILIENT VEJLEWEST CITY
Use of the West City as a laboratory for social cohesion

Description: A number of efforts are taking place 
to integrate a comprehensive approach to building 
resilience within existing projects around Vestbyen. 
The area includes social housing, The Spinning Mill 
(one of Denmark’s largest development and innovation 
environments), FabLab (Manufacturing Laboratory 
- contains digital fabrication, design and innovation 
training for school students), and a number of urban 
gardens. We are keen on drawing parallels from URBACT 
to build environmental and social resilience. 

Objective: To develop Vestbyen to become a 
resilient and self-sufficient community by setting up a 
Coordination Group within the Municipality to combine 
the various initiatives taking place to strengthen 
resilience and social cohesion. This will include efforts 
around our EU projects.

Action owner: Municipality of Vejle. Welfare 
Administration, Children and Youth Administration, 
Economy- Labor market and Health Administration and, 
Technical & Environment Department.

Timeframe: Short-term
Resilience value: This responds to current 
and approaching challenges of great importance to 
local communities.

•  Cross disciplinary collaboration to 

foster long term planning

•  Better use of existing facilities to 

increase social cohesion

•  Ensure effective management 

and leadership in the city

” THE MOST IMPORTANT CROP WE HAVE ARE 
COMMUNITIES – GOOD COMMUNITIES GROW 
STRONG NEIGHBORHOODS AND CITIES, WITH 
CITIZENS THAT ARE INTERESTED IN EACH OTHER 
AND IN MOLDING THE CITY. THE DISTANCE 
BETWEEN PEOPLE DECREASES WHEN THEY ARE 
NOT ONLY STRANGERS PASSING ON THE STREET, 
AND IF WE CAN SUPPLEMENT THAT EFFECT 
WITH A WISH TO DO SOMETHING GOOD FOR THE 
WORLD – IN THE FORM OF SELF-SUFFICIENCY, 
SUSTAINABILITY AND ECOLOGY – THEN WE WILL 
HAVE COME A LONG WAY.”
Charlotte Virkelyst, Chairman for Grow Vejle 

Goals 3.2:
We will make urban 
spaces and social 
housing central to 
community cohesion

Supporting Action 3.2.B: 
Maintain the Grow Vejle association
Description: Grow Vejle is a community driven 
association established in 2013 with the aim to promote 
awareness of the value of healthy and fresh food whilst 
minimizing damage to the environment. Grow Vejle 
provides mobile urban gardens for citizens who do 
not have the opportunity or time to own a garden and 
locates them in vacant and parking lots. Food growing 
therefore becomes a catalyst to bring people together.
Action owner: Community run organization 
’Grow Vejle’
Resilience Value:
•  Promote environmental awareness 

and secure locally produced food

•  Promote social cohesion
•  Lead a healthy lifestyle

Supporting Action 3.2.C:  
Establish the URBACT Resilient Europe initiative
Description: URBACT Resilient Europe stems from 
the work with 100RC. It is a collaborative project 
between a network of cities across Europe, including 
Vejle, Glasgow, Rotterdam, Burgas and Thessaloniki. 
The aim is for the cities to work together to learn 
and share experiences from one another to build 
resilience. Three topics have been identified: Resilient 
People, Resilient Places and Resilient Institutions.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Short-term
Resilience Value:
•  Collaboration to foster long term planning
•  Sharing of knowledge and best 
practice across different sectors

•  Ensure effective and collaborative 

management and leadership

39

RESILIENT VEJLESTRENGTHEN COHESION

” THE NEXT GENERATION IS OUR FUTURE – WE NEED TO 
CREATE THE BEST CIRCUMSTANCES FOR THEM. ALL THE 
INITIATIVES WE HAVE UNDERWAY AND THE SOCIETY 
WE HAVE CREATED WILL SHAPE THE FUTURE. WE ALL 
PLAY A SIGNIFICANT ROLE IN CREATING A SOCIETY 
THAT IS BASED ON DIALOG AND COHESION – WE MUST 
TAKE THAT ROLE SERIOUSLY.” 
Rafel Shamri, Winner of The European Citizenship Prize 2015

40

RESILIENT VEJLESTRENGTHEN COHESION
Create new platforms for communities

Description: Social cohesion in Vejle is under 
pressure, there is a growing need for strong communities 
and venues for people to come together. Strengthening 
social cohesion is an important element for developing a 
resilient and sustainable society in Vejle. We believe that 
place has an influence on the creation of communities, 
and is a catalyst towards fostering dynamic social 
cohesion. We will initially focus on retrofitting The 
Spinning Mill and encourage the use of this old industrial 
building as communal spaces for communities to come 
together, and in creating an exciting environment for 
innovation, art and businesses. 

Objective: To create new community spaces to 
strengthen cohesion. We want the city spaces to be the 
venues where dynamic cohesion is being developed and 
citizens can actively engage with each other. This will 
also improve civil involvement in integration to ensure 
social cohesion. 

Action owner: Municipality of Vejle: Welfare 
Administration, Children and Youth Administration, 
Economy- Labor market and Health Administration, 
Technical & Environment Department, and Culture & 
Leisure Department.

Timeframe: Short-term
Resilience value: This responds to current 
and approaching challenges of great importance to 
local communities.
•  Promote social cohesion across cultures
•  Empower the community through citizen engagement
•  Strengthen cohesion across the city

Goals 3.2:
We will make urban 
spaces and social 
housing central to 
community cohesion

Supporting Action 3.2.E: 
Investigate Vestergade as a facility for 
vulnerable citizens
Description: In collaboration with the KFUM’s (YMCA) 
social workspace The Parasol, we have designated 
Vestergade, a street in Vejle, as a space for people with 
drug addictions to gather. This focuses on the welfare 
of the addicts and functions in an open and transparent 
way so that the local community of shops and residents 
are engaged and can offer support the addicts in a 
safe way.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Short-term
Resilience Value:
•  Promote social cohesion 
•  Create inclusive spaces

Supporting Action 3.2.F:  
Establish The Embassy Café
Description: The Embassy Café is located in one of 
the city’s popular parks. It offers an opportunity for 
people with learning difficulties to operate the cafe 
and the adjacent ice rink. The café demonstrates that 
everyone in Vejle is able to contribute to the operation 
of the city.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Short-term
Resilience Value:
•  Empower vulnerable parts of the community
•  Promote social cohesion and inclusivity
•  Participate in the economic activity of the city

41

RESILIENT VEJLESOCIAL HOUSING MASTER PLANS

Foto: AAB

42

RESILIENT VEJLESOCIAL HOUSING MASTER PLANS
Develop social housing estates ‘Løget’ and 
‘Nørremarken’ with possible investments from the 
Municipality and external financing bodies

Description: The social housing master plans are 
4-year plans to improve the social housing environment 
in Løget (989 households) and Nørremarken (1,061 
households). These masterplans focus on four main 
areas: Safety and well-being; Employment and 
education; Parental responsibility; and Crime preventive. 

Objective: The masterplans aim to improve the social 
housing estates, strengthen social cohesion, stimulate 
economic growth, and reduce the gap between 
neighborhoods in Vejle. 

Action owner: The not-for-profit housing 
associations ØsterBO, Lejerbo and AAB along with The 
Municipality of Vejle. 

Timeframe: Short-term
Resilience value: Strengthen local identity 
and engage citizens to promote social cohesion and 
urban equality..
•  Foster long term planning 
•  Improve the quality of life
•  Promote economic growth

" IN NØRREMARKEN YOU COULD ALWAYS 
JUST KNOCK ON THE NEIGHBOR’S DOOR TO 
BORROW WHATEVER YOU WERE SHORT OFF, 
WHEN YOU NEEDED IT. IT HAD AND STILL HAS 
COMMUNITY THAT OTHER AREAS OF THE CITY 
PROBABLY WON’T BE ABLE TO BOAST ABOUT."
Mahmoud El-Hassan from the book  
“From my world – stories from Nørremarken”

Goals 3.2:
We will make urban 
spaces and social 
housing central to 
community cohesion

Supporting Action 3.2.H: 
The Stairway Ambassadors initiative
Description: Stairway Ambassadors is an initiative 
where residents of two neighborhoods in Vejle 
welcome new residents and help them settle in their 
new homes with the aim to build inclusive communities.  
The initiative is part of the social housing masterplans.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Short-term
Resilience Value:
•  Promote social cohesion
•  Establish social networks 
•  Promote social integration
•  Build inclusive communities

Supporting Action 3.2.I:  
The Health Agents program
Description: The Health Agents program is aimed at 
volunteers who would like to acquire training in health 
to help others lead a healthier lifestyle. After the 
training, volunteers will be given the opportunity to 
participate in creating health driven activities in Løget, 
Nørremarken and other neighborhoods in Vejle.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Short-term
Resilience Value:
•  Engagement and community participation
•  Promote education for the common good
•  Improve health and wellbeing of the community

43

RESILIENT VEJLESTRATEGIC PREVENTIVE INVESTMENTS

44

RESILIENT VEJLESTRATEGIC PREVENTIVE INVESTMENTS
Applying resilience learning from other 
sectors to public health and wellbeing

Description: Research shows that early intervention, 
such as ‘good investments’ result in direct benefits to 
vulnerable citizens and families. We will designate an 
area as a social laboratory where initiatives on strategic 
prevention and investment models can be tested. This 
could include an increased focus on parenting and 
family relationships or investigating the relation between 
resilient communities and public health. We want to 
ensure that our vulnerable citizens are not worse off.

Objective: To improve the quality of life, with a focus 
on breaking the cycle of negative social heritage and 
promoting robust public health. This is to ensure ”good 
investments” at the right time.

Action owner: Municipality of Vejle: Welfare 
Administration, Children and Youth Administration and, 
Economy- Labor market and Health Administration.

Timeframe: Medium to Long-term
Resilience value: Strategic preventative 
investments can turn a negative life around, so that 
citizens can succeed socially, undertake training, find 
employment, and have good physical and mental 
health status.

• Avoid negative social heritage and 

increase social mobility

• Healthy citizens with courage and vigor in life
• Investigate new public investment models 

” WE NEED TO LOOK AFTER PEOPLE FROM 
EARLIER STAGES. WE MUST INVEST IN PICKING 
UP ON CHALLENGES BEFORE THEY TURN INTO 
BIG PROBLEMS. BUT ONE MUST BELIEVE THAT 
IT IS POSSIBLE, SO THAT WE DON’T END UP 
WITH A DOUBLE BILL!” 
Deputy Director, Vejle Youth Educational Guidance, 
Trine Rosenbeck

Goals 3.3:
We will invest in 
Vejle’s Youth

Supporting Action 3.3.B: 
The AFKOS initiative
Description: AFKOS, (Outpatient Parenting 
Competencies Observations and Support),  is an 
initiative that helps parents develop parenting skills.The 
initiative is targeted at parents evaluated by the social 
services as needing additional support to ensure the 
wellbeing and development of the child.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Short to Medium-term
Resilience Value:
•  Promote education and training 
•  Engagement and community participation
•  Ensure health and wellbeing of children

Supporting Action 3.3.C:  
Early intervention for families with alcohol problems
Description: The action aims at using early 
intervention as a preventive measure in families with 
alcohol problems. We will focus on assisting the 
parents and improving the child’s environment by 
reducing stress factors.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Medium-term
Resilience Value:
•  Engagement and community participation
•  Promote education and training 

for vulnerable families

45

RESILIENT VEJLEYOUTH LIFE

Photo: Jonas Normann

46

RESILIENT VEJLEYOUTH LIFE
Develop initiatives to help the vulnerable 
youth groups in the city

Description: Our future society will be shaped by 
our younger generation. We will examine initiatives 
that can be launched to help improve the lives of our 
vulnerable youth. We will promote initiatives that 
prevent radicalization, and encourage them to complete 
secondary school. We will target vulnerable groups 
such as people with mental vulnerability, homeless or 
drug addicts.

Objective: To better understand what initiatives can 
kick-start to achieve a positive route for youth in Vejle, 
and in particular to help shape the future of vulnerable 
youth. This includes preventing radicalization of young 
and vulnerable groups.

Action owner: Municipality of Vejle. Welfare 
Administration, Children and Youth Administration, 
Economy- Labor market and Health Administration and, 
Culture & Leisure Department.

Timeframe: Medium to Long-term
Resilience value: Focusing on the most vulnerable 
youth and integrating them into the educational system, 
work force and society.

•  Engagement and community participation
•  Promote education for the common good
•  Promote social cohesion

” IN THE POST-MODERN SOCIETY WE LIVE 
IN TODAY, WE ARE A COMMUNITY FOR 
INDIVIDUALS AND WE ARE INDIVIDUALS THAT 
WORK TOGETHER IN A COMMUNITY. THERE IS 
NOT ONE TRUTH, BUT MANY TRUTHS. WE MUST 
LISTEN TO THE OTHERS AS WE DO NOT HAVE 
ALL THE ANSWERS OURSELVES. NO MAN IS AN 
ISLAND. IT IS NOT ENOUGH TO ‘JUST BE ME’.”  
Vicar Erik Steen Nielsen 

Goals 3.3:
We will invest in 
Vejle’s Youth

Supporting Action 3.3.E: 
The SPOR 18 Initiative
Description: Our youth’s mental health is under 
pressure. SPOR 18 is an initiative that offers advice to 
young people to help them address problems such as 
loneliness, sadness, anxiety, sexuality, stress and others. 
SPOR 18 is run by counselors and professionals trained 
in mental health. (SPOR = Track)
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Ongoing
Resilience Value:
•  Promote the health and wellbeing of 

vulnerable youth communities

•  Promote social cohesion

Supporting Action 3.3.F:  
‘Through Fire and Water’ initiative
Description: The initiative started in 2007 and 
is aimed at giving firefighter training courses to 
vulnerable young people from the city’s schools aged 
between 13 and 16 years. The training takes place in 
Vejle fire station and the lessons include first aid, basic 
firefighting and smoke diving. The objective is to build 
their self-esteem, confidence and instil a sense of 
community spirit.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle, SSP
Timeframe: Ongoing
Resilience Value:
•  Promote educational and training development
•  Exposure to potential future jobs
•  Promote social cohesion

47

RESILIENT VEJLEADVANCED SMART LIGHTING

48

RESILIENT VEJLEADVANCED SMART LIGHTING
Using the streetlights to integrate smart technologies

Description: We aim to replace the lighting fixtures 
with LED lights and integrate wireless communications, 
sensors, plug-in for electric car or other future 
technologies with the new streetlights, to manage traffic, 
receive parking information, climate information, tourist 
services and others. By the end of 2015, more than 40% 
of the lights have already been replaced.

Objective: Use the upgrade of lighting to integrate 
various city systems and lay the foundations for 
subsequent smart city solutions. This could include 
wireless communications infrastructure, sensors, 
plugs for electrical vehicles and other future modes 
of transport.

Action owner: Municipality of Vejle: Technical & 
Environment Department, and Economy- Labor market 
and Health Administration.

Timeframe: Short to Medium-term 
Resilience value: Financially stronger solutions for 
lowering energy demand and carbon emissions.

•  Promote a smart and longer term planning
•  Engage community in smart solutions
•  Promote knowledge around smart approaches 

Goals 4.1:
We will use Smart 
technology to create 
an efficient society

Supporting Action 4.1.B: 
Investigate an Intelligent traffic management 
for Vejle
Description: A lot of time is being wasted at traffic 
lights in Vejle, costing hundreds of millions of Danish 
krone yearly. We want to address this by undertaking 
a feasibility study for an intelligent traffic system, and 
to understand its contribution to a greener, better 
managed urban environment.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Ongoing
Resilience Value:
•  Promote smart and green mobility infrastructure
•  Promote long term planning
•  Improve air quality
•  Improve health and wellbeing of the community

Supporting Action 4.1.C:  
Develop a smart digital parking strategy for Vejle
Description: The Municipality of Vejle will develop a 
digital smart parking strategy, which will include the 
development of an application (‘app’) with features 
such as pay by phone, and identification of the 
location of nearest available parking spot.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Ongoing
Resilience Value:
•  Improved decision making
•  Promote smart infrastructure
•  Contribute to a cleaner environment

49

RESILIENT VEJLEDIGITAL INCLUSION

Photo: VejleMuseerne

50

” DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT MOVES FASTER AND FASTER, THIS CAN PRESENT 
NEW EDUCATIONAL / DIGITAL OPPORTUNITIES, BUT ONLY IF WE INCLUDE 
CHILDREN, TEACHERS AND RESEARCHERS IN THE PROCESS. AS A COMMUNITY 
WE MUST PREPARE CHILDREN FOR A DIGITAL FUTURE THAT WE DON’T YET 
FULLY UNDERSTAND. THIS IS ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT TASKS OVERALL. 
NOT JUST IN TERMS OF LEARNING, BUT ALSO WHEN IT COMES TO PREPARING 
A SMART AND RESILIENT CITY TO FUTURE CHALLENGES.”
Development Consultant, Jacob Knudsen, VIFIN 

RESILIENT VEJLEDIGITAL INCLUSION
Provide citizens, youth and elderly people, with the necessary 
support to keep up to date with digital technologies

Description: Denmark is at the forefront of 
digitalization due to our high educational levels and the 
fact that we use digital functions as part of our daily life 
e.g. Digital Post. However, some of our young and older 
generations, along with some businesses find it difficult 
to navigate through the digital world and therefore are 
at risk of being digitally excluded. We will develop plans 
to make the people in Vejle ’smart’ and central to the 
digital society.  The municipality also recognizes the role 
schools can play and hence has set the ’Vejle Digital 
School’ initiative to start preparing the young generation 
today for the jobs of the future. 

Objective: To ensure everyone in Vejle has the 
necessary digital skills required for optimized education 
and employment. 

Action owner: Municipality of Vejle. Economy- 
Labor market and Health Administration, Children and 
Youth Administration and, Welfare Administration. 

Timeframe: Short-term
Resilience value: Enable citizens to participate  
and become active in digital communities. 
•  Ensure digital inclusivity for all citizens of Vejle
•  Promote education and training 
•  Encourage social cohesion

Goals 4.2:
We will support 
young citizens 
education in digital 
technologies

Supporting Action 4.2.B: 
The FABlab@schoolsdk initiative
Description: The Municipality of Vejle, in collaboration 
with Aarhus municipality, Silkeborg municipality, 
Stanford University, and Aarhus university, is giving 
students the opportunity to examine, test and design 
new digital technologies. The aim is to allow the pupils 
to see themselves as designers and problem solvers 
and not just users. Through this exposure, we aim to 
prepare them and give them an insight on the jobs of 
the future.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle, The Spinning Mill 
Timeframe: Ongoing
Resilience Value:
•  Promote education and training 

to the future generation

•  Integrate the youth into the city’s economic growth

Supporting Action 4.2.C:  
The Robot laboratory at SDE
Description: Southern College has established a 
new CNC technology center in cooperation with the 
Municipality of Vejle. The center will include a CNC 
technology zone, and a robot machining center for 
teaching and/or training. School students can visit 
the center to get training on technology education 
through concept development, programming and 
use of small industrial robots to inspire them for the 
future. The center aims to ensure that there is the 
necessary skilled workforce for the jobs of the future.
Action owner: Syddansk business school
Timeframe: Ongoing
Resilience Value:
•  Promote education and training 

to the future generation

•  Encourage social cohesion

51

RESILIENT VEJLEDIGITAL RESILIENCE

52

RESILIENT VEJLEDIGITAL RESILIENCE
Develop a set of standards to be shared across the 
council to increase digital resilience and cybersecurity

Description: Smart City solutions help to solve some 
of the challenges and risks that Vejle as a city is facing. 
However, there is a risk that new technologies bring 
new risks and threats. We therefore need to increase 
our focus on cybersecurity and the reliability of the 
Smart City elements introduced in the city. The aim of 
Digital Resilience is develop a set of standards that focus 
on cybersecurity and the reliability of our smart city 
infrastructure.  

Objective: To ensure our systems are able to 
continue working during a shock or failure e.g. flooding 
or cyber-attacks. Clear rules for what data we collect 
how we store and use it will also be included. 

Action owner: Initially Municipality of Vejle: 
Economy- Labor market and Health Administration 
and, Technical & Environment Department. The second 
phase, will aim to involve key players from utility and 
telecommunication companies. 

Timeframe: Short-term 
Resilience value: 

•  Reduce vulnerability of digital systems
•  Promote long term planning
•  Ensure reliable and robust infrastructure 

and communication

Goals 4.3:
We will facilitate 
public access to 
open data towards 
creating a digital 
society

Supporting Action 4.3.B: 
Develop the Vejle Open Data initiative 
Description: We will make data freely available in Vejle 
to support the economic growth of the city, and ensure 
transparency in the public administration. Opening up 
the data will allow businesses and entrepreneurs to 
develop new business services and business models.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle  
Timeframe: Ongoing
Resilience Value:
•  Ensure effective management and leadership
•  Promote economic growth
•  Generate jobs

Supporting Action 4.3.C:  
Participation in the Smart Mature Resilience project
Description: Smart Mature Resilience (SMR) is an EU 
project that aims to develop guidelines on resilience 
assessment and implementation to increase Europe’s 
resilience to shocks and stresses.  SMR will develop 
and validate the guidelines using three pilot projects 
covering security sectors, climate change and 
social dynamics.
Action owner: Municipality of Vejle
Timeframe: Ongoing
Resilience Value:
•  Foster long term planning
•  Share knowledge and learnings amongst cities
•  Generate jobs

53

RESILIENT VEJLE” IN VEJLE WE BELIEVE 
THAT STRATEGIES BECOME 
REALITY BECAUSE THERE 
IS POLITICAL WILL AND 
ACTION BEHIND THEM.”

Mayor Arne Sigtenbjerggard

3

THE STRATEGY PROCESS

Vejle’s approach to resilience

” URBAN RESILIENCE IS THE CAPACITY 
OF INDIVIDUALS, COMMUNITIES, 
INSTITUTIONS, BUSINESSES, AND 
SYSTEMS WITHIN A CITY TO SURVIVE, 
ADAPT, AND GROW NO MATTER WHAT 
KINDS OF CHRONIC STRESSES AND 
ACUTE SHOCKS THEY EXPERIENCE.”

100 Resilient Cities

City Resilience 
Framework  
(The Rockefeller 
Foundation/  
Arup 2014)

ership & 
ment

e
g
a
n
a
 m
e
v
i
t
c
e
f
f
e

d
a
 le
s
e
t
o
m
o
r
P

c
o
m
m
u

n

i

c

P

r

o

v

i

d

a

t

e

s

i

 

o

r

n

 

e

l
i

&

a

 

b

m

o

l

e

 

b

ili

t
y

s t e
o
F
&  i n t e

Empowers a broad 
range of stakeholders
Leadership and strate

s

r

y

r
g

g

t e r m 

 l o n g -
t e d   p l a n ning
a

Meets
basic needs

m

e

livelih
Health & w
plo
y

S

u

p

p

o

o

orts, 

d
s 

&

m

e

n
t

ellb

e
i

n

g

h

E

e

n

a

s

l
t

u

h

r

 

e

s

s

e

 

r

p

v

u

i

c

b

e
s

l

i

c

 

I

n

f

r

a

s

t
r
u

c
t
u
r

E

n

s

u
r
e

o

f 
c
ritic

s c
o

e & environment

al s

ntinuity 

ervices 

Provides & enhances
natural and manmade 

assets

 

&
s
 
e
 
e
i
t
i
v
n
si
u
e
m
h
m
o
s c
o
d c
Promote
e
g
E c o no my & society
 enga
E nsures social stability,
security and justice

Fo s t e r s   e c

o

o m ic
n
p r o s p e rit y

56

RESILIENT VEJLEVejle’s resilience strategy is Denmark’s first 
fully integrated response to city resilience. It 
addresses future uncertainty. Its holistic approach 
is essential to help tackle the shocks and stresses 
we face today, as well as tomorrow, and to 
transform our challenges into opportunities. 
Through cooperation with 100RC, Vejle has 
gained access to a framework, methods and 
tools for diagnosing shocks and stresses, and 
for enhancing resilience through strategic 
urban development.

City Resilience Framework  
Vejle’s understanding of resilience is shaped 
by the City Resilience Framework (CRF), 
developed by The Rockefeller Foundation 
and Arup (2014), and used by 100 Resilient 
Cities (100RC) as the foundation of a holistic 
approach to city resilience. The CRF provides a 
lens through which the complexity of cities and 
the numerous factors that contribute to a city’s 
resilience can be understood. It comprises four 
dimensions and twelve key drivers, as illustrated 
by the two rings of the diagram. 

A resilient city also exhibits seven qualities, 
which should be evident in the way the city – or 
any system, function or asset within the city – 
operates. These qualities are:

Reflective - able to learn from past experiences 
to inform future decisions. 

Resourceful - able to recognize alternative ways 
to use resources at times of crisis, in order to 
meet needs or achieve goals.  

Inclusive – able to create a shared sense of 
ownership in decision making throughout 
the city, incorporating the knowledge 
and perspectives of all majority and 
minority groups.

Integrated – able to coordinate work 
across institutions and systems to catalyze 
additional benefits.

Robust – comprising well-conceived, 
constructed and managed systems, capable of 
withstanding sudden shocks.

Redundant - purposefully incorporating spare 
capacity to accommodate disruption due to 
extreme pressures, surges in demand or an 
external event.

Flexible - willing and able to adopt 
alternative strategies in response to changing 
circumstances or sudden crises.

57

RESILIENT VEJLEsystem is currently under pressure, both 
nationally and in Vejle, from demographic 
changes and increased polarization of 
communities. A number of cutbacks to existing 
initiatives are expected, which means the 
apparent good performance of the past is 
not expected to continue. Promoting social 
cohesion and citizen empowerment are huge 
concerns for stakeholders, and would require 
new and innovative cross-department initiatives 
to address them. Climate change, in particular 
flooding, was also identified by stakeholders 
as a stress that needs to be addressed. Our 
Preliminary Resilience Assessment led us to four 
discovery areas, which we focused on in greater 
detail as we developed the resilience strategy. 

Resilience Strategy 
Development
This Resilience Strategy builds on our existing 
capabilities, and addresses cross-cutting and 
emerging shocks and stresses within the 
environment, the economy and society. The 
strategy was developed by identifying the 
gaps in our existing approach to the city’s 
resilience, which may prevent us from adequately 
addressing the shocks and stresses we face. 
We have reviewed the city’s current and future 
plans, projects and aspirations against the CRF 
and 100RC methodology, to determine how they 
contribute to our resilience agenda. In doing 
so, we have also identified new opportunities 
that would strengthen our overall approach 
to resilience.

In Phase I of Vejle’s resilience strategy 
development, we looked at the city holistically 
to develop a Preliminary Resilience Assessment 
(PRA). We held a number of workshops to 
develop an understanding of the shocks and 
stresses facing the city, the vulnerable assets, 
people’s perceptions and the city actions. 

The PRA indicated that whilst there is a number 
of actions being taken across the drivers of 
the City Resilience Framework, these are not 
perceived by stakeholders as strengths for the 
city. The stakeholders particularly identified 
weaknesses related to ‘cohesive communities’ 
and ‘empowerment of stakeholders’. These 
perceptions arise from the fact the welfare 

p
o

a  
d
n
e
g
A

Worksh

nce  
alysis
Resilie

n
A

er 
nt
old
e
m
h
e
Stake
g
a
g
n
E

58

ostic 
n
g
Work
Dia

nt of 
as

e
m
p

Discovery Are

evelo

D

as

nt  
e
m
p

of Discovery Are

evelo

D

e

gs 
ncil
etin
u
o
e City C
d m
e
m
e
in th
h
T

y
g

nce  
Resilie
Strate

ns

nce & 
ality Le
Resilie
Re

all
n 
bilizatio
n C
e
p
d O

o
M

n
a

RESILIENT VEJLEThe political process
The City Council is the unifying and leading 
body for Vejle’s resilience strategy. To assist 
the strategy development through the political 
process, we published a collection of examples 
from existing resilience activities in Vejle, 
including political delegations to Glasgow, 
Rotterdam, Eindhoven and Barcelona, and 
discussions at City Council meetings and 
Financial and Specialist committees.

Value Creation
The resilience strategy process has been the 
catalyst for a number of long-term political and 
strategic resilience agendas, a comprehensive 
development process at the political and 
professional level, the agreement of a number of 
actions, and inception of two major EU projects 
in Vejle. The partnerships we have established 
during the process have led to a number of ”city 
laboratories for resilience”, such as the Resilience 
Lab Denmark.

Workshop with students “The Future Resilient City.

In Phase II we explored a series of research 
questions and activities to identify gaps in 
knowledge/action and resilience building 
opportunities within the discovery areas. 
Workshops were carried out across stakeholder 
groups between September and December 2015. 
Gaps, opportunities, goals and actions were 
identified across the four discovery areas.  

Stakeholder mobilization, dialogue  
and co-creation
During the process, Vejle focused on engaging 
with municipal employees and businesses 
through a series of open events, meetings and 
conferences. We have established partnerships 
and collaborations with businesses, housing 
associations, and educational institutions, which 
were instrumental in identifying resilience 
actions. As part of our commitment to the 100RC 
network and strengthening the resilience of 
Vejle, we have encouraged professionals to take 
part in developing new resilience initiatives and 
opportunities for the city. We have engaged 
with them during the strategy process through 
workshops and conversations and invited 
communities from across the city to present  
their best resilience ideas and initiatives, through 
an Open Call from first of November 2015 to  
late January 2016. 

A variety of these initiatives identified collectively 
have contributed to the Priority Actions 
(Lighthouse Actions) described in Chapter 2.  
The combined 100 Actions and Initiatives  
will be further developed, and facilitated by  
Vejle in 2016-2020. 

Resilient Vejle 
team meeting.

Workshop with Arcadis.

59

RESILIENT VEJLEVejle’s Resilience 
Diagnostic
 
A shock is a sudden, acute event that may 
affect the city, such as a major flood or 
disease outbreak.
A stress is a chronic condition that gradually 
weakens the city’s fabric on a daily or cyclical 
basis, such as high rates of unemployment or 
severe traffic congestion. 

In Vejle, the stresses we face on a daily basis are 
more significant than the relatively minor risk 
we face from major shocks. The primary focus 
of this resilience strategy is therefore to address 
our stresses. These challenges are well known; 
what remains to be seen is how they will manifest 
themselves in the long term.

Climate and flooding
Over recent decades, our climate has changed, 
increasing the risk of major floods in Vejle 
significantly. The threat of flooding is both a 
sudden shock and a long-term stress to the city. 

Over the past few hundred years, floods were 
recorded in the city every 4 or 5 years, however 
in the past decade, this rate has increased 
significantly. International organizations including 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) and the Danish Meteorological Institute 
expect that climate change will bring more 
extreme rainfall, continued sea level rise and 
warmer weather in the future. The probability 
of flooding will increase over time, risking major 
damage to coastal areas by the fjord, harbor area 
and city centre. The impact of a 100-year storm 
could be disastrous. 

The Municipality of Vejle has carried out several 
climate change and flooding risk and impact 
analyses. A Climate Change Adaptation Plan was 
developed in 2014, as well as a Risk Management 
Plan in connection with the EU Floods Directive, 
which has recently been approved by the City 
Council. These analyses suggest that the risk of 
flooding is increasing in large parts of the city. 

60

To tackle this challenge, an investigation has 
been launched to consider the city’s hydrological 
conditions and drainage system as well as 
conditions around the fjord.

These analyses sought to optimize the city’s 
existing systems, reducing flood risk and allowing 
us to assess future climate risks and impact 
to the overall system. The current model has 
identified a number of critical issues as well as 
recommendations to address them. A proposal 
has also been developed to integrate flood 
protection into the overall urban development 
plan around the inlet. 

Through the resilience strategy, Vejle has further 
identified the physical, social and economic 
implications of these flood risks, including 
increasing pressure on the city’s basic functions 
and utility supplies. As a result, Vejle has taken 
the initiative to work more closely with energy, 
water and telecommunication utility companies. 
Climate change affects all communities and 
may lead to an increase in the polarization of 
society due to differentiated impacts between 
neighborhoods. Flooding also poses an increased 
risk of disease spreading if water from the 
sewage systems overflows. Over time this could 
discourage investment in the city. The threat of 
flooding also implies higher insurance premiums 
and lower levels of economic growth. Neither 
private citizens nor companies will settle where 
they are threatened by water.

In the short term, we are concerned with 
optimizing the city’s capacity to withstand the 
risks we’re facing. This includes both the technical 
infrastructure needed to manage water flows, 
as well as overall organizational readiness. In 
the long run this means looking at shocks and 
stresses as well as opportunities. Several physical 
changes are taking place in Vejle at the moment, 
especially in the most climate vulnerable areas 
of the city. We have to act now to ensure we 
put in place durable and sustainable solutions; 
adaptation to climate change must be integrated 
into existing urban development plans.

RESILIENT VEJLERegional urbanization
Rising population and regional urbanization pose 
an increasing challenge to Vejle’s infrastructure 
and mobility capacity. Expansion of transport 
systems is expected to increase to the extent 
that it totally overshadows all positive initiatives 
to reduce CO2 in other sectors including 
heating, electricity and agriculture. Alongside 
rising energy prices this trend has led to the 
development of Vejle’s Strategic Energy Plan in 
2010. The resilience strategy will continue this 
work and develop initiatives in transport and 
mobility, renewable energy and sustainability. This 
will help to reduce CO2 emissions and contribute 
to a cleaner, healthier city. Furthermore, Vejle will 
work to make its climate challenge a driver of 
new jobs in Vejle’s ”green” business sector. 

Smart, safe and inclusive infrastructure
Through the strategy process, Vejle mapped 
the city’s assets and infrastructure to identify 
critical areas with potential for innovation. This 
evaluation found that day-to-day, the Municipality 
of Vejle manages its infrastructure and assets 
well, and that all relevant plans are up to date. 
However, there are also some areas, especially 
around the fjord in the west of the city and 
central areas that are particularly vulnerable 
to climate change and increased urbanization. 
Further work is needed in these areas to ensure 
increased accessibility and inclusiveness for 
vulnerable social groups.

Digitalization – new solutions and challenges
The city, its businesses and citizens are in 
the process of implementing new digital and 
smart technologies. The municipality is using 
these in citizen and public services, as well as 
energy and education. Digitalization is a driver 
of efficiency, growth and job creation, and will 
provide solutions to many of the stresses the city 
faces. But it also has the potential to exacerbate 
divisions in our society, between those with 
access and those without. As the city becomes 
more dependent on digital systems, the issue of 
IT security for the city’s functions, services and 
supplies is also becoming more pressing.

Changing industries and the future labor market
The financial crisis in 2009 taught us that our 
industries and economy are even more closely 
connected to the global economy than we ever 
imagined. We are now facing an era in which 
industries and technology are evolving and 
creating new opportunities but the labor market 
is also more turbulent, new skills are required 
and employment conditions are more precarious 
for some. To ensure economic resilience, the 
Municipality of Vejle will continue to develop a 
collaborative relationship with local businesses 
and help to prepare future generations for 
these conditions.

Our welfare model is facing increasing pressure
Social and economic changes are placing 
increasing pressure on the strong Danish welfare 
model’s capacity to provide high quality public 
services. Demographic changes – such as aging 
communities and immigration - are increasing the 
social divide and presenting additional stress to 
public social services, city functions and utilities, 
which is leading to a rise in inequality, vulnerable 
groups and marginalized citizens. The influx of 
immigrants is also accelerating the continued 
stress on the welfare system, by increasing the 
growth in unskilled labor, therefore increasing 
unemployment and financial instability. 

Vejle will therefore place a greater focus on being 
a flexible and adaptable municipality - both as 
an organization and as a community. Through 
the development of the resilience strategy, Vejle 
has identified opportunities to increase public 
spending for vulnerable families and youth, to 
improve the quality of life for immigrants and 
to improve certain residential and urban areas. 
The resilience strategy also reveals an increasing 
need for innovative actions that address social 
cohesion as our society becomes more diverse, 
especially in relation to immigration and 
vulnerable children and young people.

61

RESILIENT VEJLEResponding to our Stresses 
– Discovering Solutions
Having understood our existing resilience 
profile, and the shocks and stresses we need 
to prepare for, we were able to focus on the 
types of solutions that will help us to build our 
resilience for the future. These solutions fall into 
four main groups, which reflect the pillars of our 
resilience strategy.

Resilience and urbanization
Today more than half of the world’s population 
lives in cities, a trend that is expected to continue 
and could reach 75% by 2050. This implies 
not only a quantitative change in the number 
of people living in cities, but also a qualitative 
change in the way we live in urban environments. 
Cities are social and cultural centers, and 
engines for economic growth, but while urban 
development has many advantages, it can also 
accentuate the challenges cities face. In Vejle 
we are experiencing increasing urbanization, 
though not at the rate of some parts of the world. 
Nevertheless, we must prepare for it. So we ask 
ourselves, how should we go about it and plan for 
the future?

From safeguarding society, to innovating for 
long-term benefit
Vejle has a strong track-record in risk 
management and safeguarding the city against 
sudden disasters, thanks to a cooperative 

approach between professionals and citizens. 
This helps prevent crises and facilitates planning 
in the event of problems. By continually adapting 
and optimizing the city’s physical infrastructure, 
we are able to protect and regulate our society. 
We are also experienced at reacting to our 
current shocks and stresses. At the same time, 
we have a well functioning welfare society, 
which is the basis of our prosperity and growth. 
We support vulnerable citizens through close 
cooperation between government, civil society, 
private institutions and industry. 

Together we are capable of withstanding 
stresses, optimizing our capacity to solve new 
challenges and ensuring the needs of our 
citizens are met. In Vejle, we will enhance the 
city’s organizational, managerial and societal 
preparedness to guide us towards a future in 
which we are able to respond proactively to 
stresses and shocks, preventing them from 
escalating or recurring, and transforming them 
into drivers of development for the city.

Resilience through co-creation
In Vejle, we will work together to solve the 
challenges of tomorrow - locally, regionally, 
nationally and internationally. We share the risk, 
so we must co-create the solutions. Co-creation 
through democracy and consensus are an 
essential part of creating a more resilient future. 

62

Photo: Simon Jeppesen.

RESILIENT VEJLEVejle’s collaborative approach to resilience is 
about looking beyond the political, social and 
economic differences and using the strong 
tradition of collaboration to create realistic 
long term solutions. The work on resilience is 
integrated with a comprehensive strategy for 
co-creation across all sectors and departments, 
for the development and implementation of 
methods, values and organizational principles. 

Economic resilience through value-adding 
prevention
Facing new stresses and shocks can mean new 
costs, but it doesn’t have to be this way. By 
focusing on resilience, wherever possible we will 
create multiple co-benefits via new solutions 
to new challenges. Through innovative and 
progressive funding models we are seeking to 
increase the investment potential of the city 
and its districts while reducing the risks - for 
example of flooding - for the benefit of investors, 
homeowners and all those who live, work and 
visit the city. Multifunctional recreational spaces 
which also protect the city against storm surges 
are one such example of the co-benefits of this 
approach. Resilience is about daring to look 
ahead, anticipating the shocks and stresses 
coming, to adapt and invest before it happens. 

We will use resilience thinking to consider risks 
such as climate change and demographic 
pressures in innovative new ways. And we will  
use resilience thinking to focus holistically on  
co-creation, innovation, urban communities and 
the economy.

Governance of the Strategy 
Development Process
Vejle’s Chief Resilience Officer (CRO), Jonas 
Kroustrup, is the day-to-day lead for the resilience 
work, reporting to the Mayor and City Chief 
Executive. Under the leadership of the Political 
Steering Committee, and with assistance from 
Municipality employees and external partners, 
Jonas has led the strategy development process. 
International organizations and organizations 
such as ICLEI and Arup have also assisted as 
strategic partners in the process.

We have engaged and worked closely with our 
stakeholders including the communities, NGOs, 
businesses and cities from the 100RC network to 
inform our diagnostic activities and identification 
of resilience building opportunities.

The development of Vejle’s resilience strategy 
has been guided by a Steering Committee, which 
brings together the core groups of decision 
makers and stakeholders. These include the 
City Council, the Financial Committee and the 
Executive Board. In addition. The Municipality’s 
Innovation Committee also had an essential role 
as an Advisory Board.  

The strategy has also been cemented through 
existing partnerships with the Educational 
Council, the Business Relations Committee and 
the Housing Strategic Steering Group.  At the 
same time, Vejle has facilitated new knowledge, 
dialogue and cooperation through the Resilience 
Forum. Here researchers and interest groups 
have contributed to the development and 
understanding of resilience in Vejle.

Vejle has chosen this management model to 
build a strong internal and external engagement 
system for optimum leadership, co-creation, 
knowledge, and long-term partnerships. 
This opens up the resilience strategy to the 
municipality’s key partners in education, business, 
housing and local associations. This has created 
the optimal platform for co-creation, knowledge 
sharing, feedback and long-term partnerships.  

63

RESILIENT VEJLE2

4

6

8

1

3

5

7

64

RESILIENT VEJLEVejle and 100 RC

1.  Vejle selected from 600 cities  

around the world

In December 2013, Vejle was selected as one of 
the first 32 cities to join the 100 Resilient Cities 
(100RC) network. Our application to the 100RC 
initiative was initiated by Vejle’s Research Centre for 
Integration (VIFIN), emphasizing our experience in 
community building in vulnerable residential areas. 
The launch of the strategy process was marked by 
a press conference by The Rockefeller Foundation 
in New York.
Photo: The press conference in New York was attended by the 
Deputy Mayor and Chairman of the Science & Environment 
Committee in Vejle, Søren Peschardt and the Project Manager 
in VIFIN, Vejle Kommune, Elizabeth Gregersen. In the middle 
President of The Rockefeller Foundation, Dr Judith Rodin. 

2. Mayors’ Convention – Bellagio, 1 – 4 Oct 2015
In October 2015 The Rockefeller Foundation invited 
mayors from the 100RC member cities to the 
Mayors’ Convention in Bellagio, Italy. It was a unique 
opportunity to share knowledge about current 
challenges; the challenge of managing refugees 
was one of the topics discussed.
Photo: At the Mayors’ Convention all the Mayors got together for 
a group photo. Vejle’s Mayor Arne Sigtenbjerggaard is in the front 
row sixth from the left. 

3. Agenda Setting Workshop, 2014
In the spring of 2014, we organized the strategy 
launch event and the agenda setting workshop, with 
attendees from 100RC and participants from other 
cities in the 100RC network. The event was held in 
The Spinning Mill and was attended by the city’s 
key stakeholders. During the event, the attendees 
participated in a number of activities aimed at 
mapping Vejle’s strengths and weaknesses. 
Photo: Agenda Setting Workshop with Michael Berkowitz (left) 
handing Mayor Arne Sigtenbjerggaard a certificate confirming 
Vejle’s selection to join 100RC.

4. First Chief Resilience Officers’ Summit, 2014
The world’s first Chief Resilience Officers’ Summit, 
the CRO Summit, was held in November 2014 in 
New Orleans. The aim was to bring together the 
CROs from around the world, and connect them 
with experts, practitioners from the public and 
private sector, and NGOs to share knowledge, best 
practice and experience about resilience.
Photo: Group picture at the conference; Vejle’s CRO Jonas 
Kroustrup in the back row to the left. In the front, second and third 
from the right are President for 100RC Michael Berkowitz and 
President for The Rockefeller Foundation Dr Judith Rodin.

5. Chief Resilience Officers’ Summit, 2015
The second CRO Summit was held in 2015 in 
Mexico City. Representatives from over 40 cities 
in the 100RC network participated. The aim of 
the summit was to improve the CROs’ ability to 
lead the resilience building agenda in their cities.
Photo: Group picture from the conference in Mexico City. 

6. High School Students visit 100RC 
A High School class from Vejle Technical College 
had a study trip planned to New York and got 
a unique chance to visit 100RC’s headquarters.  
This opportunity arose as the Technical College is 
part of the collaboration around Resilient Vejle.
Photo: Associate Director Vikram Singh, 100RC’s Relationship 
Manager for Vejle, welcomes the students from Vejle.

7. Rotterdam Water Exchange, 2015
In the Autumn of 2015, representatives from 
nine 100RC cities (including Vejle) participated 
in a workshop focusing on complex water 
related shocks and stresses, including climate 
change. This was a unique opportunity to share 
knowledge and experiences.
Photo: Chief Resilience Officers from several cities gather at 
the Benthemplein Square in Rotterdam. This is the world’s first 
‘water square’ that can safely flood to prevent uncontrolled 
flooding.

8. URBACT
Vejle is part of an URBACT partnership – Resilient 
Europe – which is an EU project created through 
the 100RC network. Besides Vejle, the cities of 
Rotterdam, Burgos, Glasgow and Thessaloniki 
are in the partnership. The goal is to increase the 
cities’ resilience and contribute to turning Europe 
into an intelligent, sustainable and inclusive 
society.  
Photo: October 2015 at the Resilient Europe meeting in 
Rotterdam. Coordinators for the Discovery Area Social 
Resilience, Ulla Varneskov is representing Vejle. She is in the 
back row second from the right.

65

RESILIENT VEJLEIMPLEMENTATION AND DELIVERY

4

”WE WILL FOCUS ON STRENGTHENING SOCIAL COHESION, ESPECIALLY IN SCHOOLS.”
From Vejle’s Municipality’s City Council team meeting on resilience, 9 December 2015 

Photo: Nils Rosenvold

68

RESILIENT VEJLEImplementation and 
Delivery (2016-2020)

We have defined a number of ambitions 
that we would like to fulfil in the period 
between 2016 and 2020. Our ambitions 
are to:
•  Create a resilient city and strong local 

communities 

•  Enable Vejle’s businesses to create 

value from the resilience strategy

•  Enable Vejle to become an innovation 

laboratory for resilience – a national 
and international pioneer that inspires 
other cities

•  Pioneer a progressive, co-creating 
and invigorating city management 
•  Demonstrate how small ‘provincial 

cities’ can become the new pioneers 
in city innovation

To meet our ambitions and ensure ongoing 
delivery of the strategy’s goals and actions, 
we will:

•  Implement the resilience actions and 
maximize the resilience value for Vejle.

  Over the coming years, Vejle will work to 

implement the actions in the resilience 
strategy taking into consideration the 
relevant political processes. We will make the 
resilience strategy central to the Municipality 
Plan, and aim to incorporate resilience into 
selected municipal policies and strategies. 

•  Establish partnerships for resilience  

within Vejle.

  We will establish a number of partnerships, 

such as ‘Resilient Vejle’ and the Resilience 
Lab, to address shocks and stresses and 
collaboratively deliver resilience solutions 
and actions. This will ensure coordination and 
integration between housing associations, 
businesses, educational and research 
institutions and the municipality.

•  Facilitate dialogue and engagement  

on the resilience agenda.

  Vejle will establish an open ‘Resilience 

Forum’, and an annual Resilience Festival 
comprising forums for discussing and 
sharing knowledge around resilience. We 
also want to be transparent and therefore 
we will share our resilience experiences 
with other municipalities, businesses and 
interested organizations in both Denmark 
and Scandinavia.  

•  Engage with 100RC and Platform Partners 

to identify effective mechanisms for 
implementation of our resilience actions.

  Vejle will continue to engage and cooperate 

with cities in the 100RC network, and the 
Platform Partners, as well as exchange 
knowledge and experiences through the 
CRO network. This will help Vejle to continue 
learning from best practices around the 
world while also promoting our own best 
practices for others. This cross-cultural 
exchange will yield value for Vejle’s citizens 
and decision makers.

•  Institutionalization of Vejle’s resilience 

strategy.

  Going forward, Vejle will work to 

institutionalize the resilience strategy by 
developing a new organizational structure in 
the municipality, including the CRO position 
alongside other supporting roles. The 
specific objectives and structure is still to  
be identified.

69

RESILIENT VEJLEPhoto: VejleMuseerne

ACTIONS CATALOGUE

5

The resilience strategy consists of 100 actions that Vejle will further 
develop, initiate or facilitate between 2016 and 2020. These actions 
focus on resilience through co-creation and will contribute to the 
development of a Resilient Vejle. The selected projects in the catalogue 
describe a range of new initiatives as well as some actions and activity 
already underway. By delivering these actions with a specific focus and 
consideration for resilience, i.e. through the resilience lens, they will 
build capacity and strengthen the resilience of Vejle. The projects and 
initiatives described are primarily owned by The Municipality of Vejle, 
and will be delivered by Specialist Committees and Departments. 

A Co-creating City

We will create tomorrow’s resilient city through productive 
partnerships across public and private sectors

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle 
Vejle 2050 - Integrate resilience into the development 
of vision ‘Vejle 2050’ and into the municipal 
development plans
Through the City Council’s vision ‘Vejle – We Make it Happen’ 
ambitious goals have been set for Vejle. The concept of Vejle 
2050 will be the driving force for developing the city. We 
will include researchers, citizens, educational institutions and 
businesses, to create an image what Vejle will look like in the 
future. This will contribute to creativity and growth across 
the city.
Goal: 1.1 + 1.2 + 1.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle 
Establish a Resilient Vejle Committee 
The Municipality of Vejle will partner with housing, business 
and educational organizations to establish a ’Resilient Vejle’ 
committee responsible for monitoring the implementation 
of the strategy, coordinating the actions across the different 
stakeholders, and raising any new challenges. 
Goal: 1.1 + 1.2 + 1.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle 
Integrate resilience into the municipality plan
We will work to integrate the Resilience strategy into the 
new municipal plan. The focus will be on the benefits of the 
resilience work undertaken to date and how to best integrate 
it into future plans and strategies for the city. 
Goal: 1.1

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle 
Develop a pioneering and inclusive new  
strategy with the  Education Council
In 2016, Municipality of Vejle will collaborate with the Board 
of Education to develop a plan that positions Vejle as an 
education hub. The municipality and the city’s educational 
institution will collaborate on developing strong educational 
offers that are widely and inclusively available, and benefit the 
most vulnerable groups as well as the most talented.
Goal: 1.1 + 1.2 + 1.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle 
Establish regional and national cooperation  
to improve Vejle’s resilience
We will collaborate with the region and the municipalities in 
the Triangle Region on the topics of mobility and business 
development, and will share the knowledge acquired during 
the 100RC process.
Goal: 1.1

72

RESILIENT VEJLEStrategic Goals

1.1  We will make resilience central to the city’s vision and plans 
1.2  We will use co-creation to build resilience capacity 
1.3  We will develop innovative resilient city solutions and scale up best practices

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle 
Co-creation strategy: Deliver an action plan for co-creation 
between citizens, businesses, unions and institutions.
We will develop and implement a co-creation strategy in 
Vejle. We want to be a resilient and co-creative municipality 
that, together with its citizens and civil stakeholders, create 
communal and better welfare solutions for our citizens. 
Through co-creation we will increase our resilience capacity 
and facilitate engaged citizen groups.  
Goal: 1.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle 
Update our employee policy
Our employee policy focuses on how ”robust communities” 
can cherish our common and individual resilience and 
robustness. We will work on updating the policy to meet 
future challenges.
Goal: 1.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, Disability Department 
The Welfare Laboratory 
The Welfare Laboratory is targeted at people experiencing 
severe physical disability, mostly living in assisted living 
facilities.  A selected panel of experts from the city will 
collaborate to identify holistic solutions to improve welfare 
standards and to build their resilience to potential shocks or 
stresses.  Co-creation is a significant element of the Welfare 
Laboratory ethos.
Goal: 1.2 + 3.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Culture and Leisure 
Department  
Resilient Art Festival
We will develop and implement a co-creation strategy in Vejle. 
We want to be a resilient and co-creative municipality that, 
together with its citizens and civil stakeholders, create communal 
and better welfare solutions for our citizens. Through co-creation 
we will increase our resilience capacity and facilitate engaged 
citizen groups.  
Goal: 1.2 + 1.3

73

RESILIENT VEJLEA Co-creating City

We will create tomorrow’s resilient city through productive 
partnerships across public and private sectors

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Culture and Leisure 
Department 
Future of communal sports halls – review of halls and 
active citizenship
We want to develop a plan to retrofit the communal halls 
into flexible meeting places that respond to our community’s 
needs. The plan will be developed with representatives of 
sports facilities, local sports organizations, associations, 
councils and the municipality management. A working group 
is currently designing a sustainable replicable model to roll 
out across the city.
Goal: 1.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, Technical and 
Environment Department
Hold a resilience exhibition in Bylaboratoriet and ‘Økolariet’
We will hold an exhibition for schools and investors to 
showcase the resilience work undertaken as part of the 100RC 
process, This will initiate dialogue on the actions, and identify 
additional resilience building ideas that could be implemented 
in Rosborg.
Goal: 1.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Explore  Digital platforms to help with city development
We will work with 100RC’s platform partners and experts, 
to explore the use of digital platforms to help with the city’s 
development. Our aim is for Vejle to be an ‘example city’ and 
inspiration for others.
Goal: 1.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Annual Resilience Festival
We will organize and host an annual conference, showcasing 
the broad range of work undertaken on resilience in Vejle 
and other 100RC cities. This includes sharing knowledge, 
case studies and latest research on topics such as urban 
development, and welfare. We aim to make Vejle a hub for 
resilience in northern Europe.  
Goal: 1.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Incorporate resilience into the annual  
innovation summer school    
Municipality of Vejle will add a module on resilience to its 
yearly innovation summer school to teach the students the 
theoretical concept of resilience and its application to inspire 
and guide them in their chosen careers in the future. 
Goal: 1.3

74

RESILIENT VEJLEStrategic Goals

1.1  We will make resilience central to the city’s vision and plans 
1.2  We will use co-creation to build resilience capacity 
1.3  We will develop innovative resilient city solutions and scale up best practices

Owner: Vejle Kommune
Rosborg: Use Rosborg as a laboratory to address the 
challenges and opportunities that Vejle will face in 2050
The Rosborg area of the city is expected to be developed 
towards 2040-50 with a view to accomodating Vejle’s growth 
with attractive residential areas. The area can be developed 
into a green city area with housing, recreational areas and 
good links to both the city and the nature in the Valley. The 
new city area will be a laboratory for social resilience, smart 
city and sustainability. 
Goal: 1.3

Owner: Vejle Kommune
Promote economic growth in Vejle Valley and Fjord
We will work to develop Vejle valley to make it attractive for 
primary occupations, new housing and leisure activities. The 
project will look to give all of Vejle’s citizens a new space 
for coming together and will attract people from within and 
outside of the city boundary. 
Goal: 1.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Culture & Leisure 
Include resilience in this year’s Spotlight Camp 
Spotlight is a summer camp created for and with the children 
and youth of Vejle, to challenge their creativity. This year’s 
camp will include a workshop entitled ”being resilient”, using 
Spotlights mission to use resilience ‘to challenge the youth 
creatively’. 
Goal: 1.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, Culture & Leisure 
Department and City Publishers 
 ‘The Book of Vejle’
The ‘City Publishers’ will, together with the Culture & Leisure 
Department, launch a writing crowdsourcing campaign to 
publish Denmark’s first book on Vejle created by its citizens. 
The ‘ City Publishers’ will facilitate the process, which extends 
over one year and includes training, workshops and various 
literary forms for inspiration.
Goal: 1.3

75

RESILIENT VEJLEA Climate Resilient City

We will use water and climate change as drivers for the  
development of the city

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Fjordbyen: Use ‘Fjordbyen’ as a laboratory for climate
change adaptation and flood control
Vejle is threatened by flooding so we must focus on 
protecting the city’s assets and citizens, in particular our 
vulnerable citizens. Vejle’s fjord area is particularly vulnerable 
to climate change. By focusing on this area of the city we will 
increase the collaboration around common challenges and 
solutions to flooding. 
Goal: 2.1 + 1.3 + 3.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Technical & 
Environment Department
Feasibility study on flood protection
We will work on a feasibility study to understand the 
economic aspect of flood protection. The cost of the 
damages caused by flooding is potentially much greater 
than the preventative investments. Flood protection schemes 
should add value to the daily lives of citizens, for example by 
providing citizens with new opportunities for leisure activities.
Goal: 2.1

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Technical & 
Environment Department
Permeable paving
We will install permeable paving to improve our water 
management system during extreme rainfall. This will be more 
cost effective than upgrading the existing sewerage system. 
This challenge will only be solved through involvement of a 
wide range of stakeholders, experts and citizens. 
Goal: 2.1

Owner: Vejle Wastewater A/S, Housing Association Østerbo, 
Technical & Environment
Østerbo LAR
The eastern part of the city is at risk of flooding from rain 
and cloudbursts. The water should be managed in a way 
that creates spaces for communities to come together and 
provides an environment where people feel safe and are 
proud to live. 
Goal: 2.1

76

RESILIENT VEJLEStrategic Goals

2.1  We will protect Vejle and turn our water into an asset for urban and social capital 
2.2  We will establish public-private partnerships for resilient utilities
2.3  We will secure growth by using sustainable resources, renewable energy and green transport

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, Vejle Wastewater A/S,  
DHI, AAU
Smart Water Vejle
We want to design and install a sluice and water distribution 
system, to minimize the risk of flooding in parts of the center 
of Vejle. We will install a sluice system along the Grejs River to 
control the water level and minimize the risk of flooding.
Goal: 2.1

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, Culture & 
Leisure Department
Host a Vild med Vand ’Into the Water’ 2.0 event
Vild med Vand is an annual water-themed event organized 
in collaboration with citizens, associations, and cultural 
institutions facilitating community engagement in the new 
town of Vejle Fjord. The town is transformed into a series of 
activities available to everyone in the city, including water 
sports, fashion shows, music, art, and architecture. 
Goal: 2.1 + 1.2 + 3.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Technical & 
Environment Department
Buildings with reinforced concrete foundations
A number of new buildings in Vejle are built on stilts – such 
as ‘The Wave’, ‘The Five Sisters’ and the entire new town at 
the harbor. In areas of soft and marshy ground conditions, it 
is necessary to use reinforced concrete pile, to ensure a solid 
foundation.  We will facilitate the implementation of design 
codes to make new construction more resilient.
Goal: 2.1

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Technical & Environment 
Department, Vejle Wastewater A/S, 
Develop a holistic strategic wastewater plan for Vejle
The Municipality of Vejle is one of few municipalities 
developing a holistic wastewater strategy that addresses 
the challenges of climate change, water supply, existing 
municipal water plans, and water quality. We want to pioneer 
this integrated approach and set a benchmark for other 
municipalities to develop the most efficient and sustainable 
solutions. The plan will provide the municipality with an 
important overview of the current systems and identify where 
further investment is needed to secure a fit-for-purpose and 
resilient wastewater system for Vejle.
Goal: 2.2

77

RESILIENT VEJLEA Climate Resilient City

We will use water and climate change as drivers for the  
development of the city

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Technical & 
Environment Department
Collaboration between citizens and companies 
around flooding
Citizens living in higher altitude areas of the valley, fjord and 
harbor must take action around storm water management on 
their own land. This will benefit people and businesses located 
lower down in the city center, reducing their risk of flooding 
the sewerage system. We will facilitate this collaboration. 
Goal: 2.2 + 1.2 + 3.2

Owner: Green Tech Center
Resilience Lab Denmark: Set up public private partnerships 
to generate simulations of the potential energy water and 
data challenges in Vejle in 2050, and leverage existing 
knowledge to identify solutions
With a focus on security of supply, we want to develop the 
public-private partnership between Green Tech Centre, VIA, 
The Municipality of Vejle, Vejle Wastewater and TREFOR. The 
goal is to strengthen coordination and innovation projects 
within energy, water and data resources to be more resilient.
Goal: 2.2 + 1.3 + 4.1

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle 
Create the Vejle Resilience House
Our resilience work with 100RC has inspired the Green Tech 
Center to develop a new ’Resilience House’. The aim of the 
house is to attract organizations working on urban resilience 
topics (climate change, water, urban developments) to 
work together to address our resilience challenges, identify 
solutions and apply them in Vejle.
Goal: 2.2 + 1.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Technical & 
Environment Department
Mobility: Reduce traffic congestion by planning a ’cycle 
super-highway’ through central Vejle
This project creates the framework for increased mobility 
between Vejle’s resilient areas – Fjordbyen, Vestbyen and in 
time Rosborg. 
We want to develop a ‘cycle super-highway’ to facilitate a 
more active lifestyle and secure a better ‘flow’ through the city 
using green transport. Improved cycle parking, shared bikes, 
and permeable paving are also under consideration as part of 
this framework. 
Goal: 2.3 + 3.2 + 4.1

78

RESILIENT VEJLEStrategic Goals

2.1  We will protect Vejle and turn our water into an asset for urban and social capital 
2.2  We will establish public-private partnerships for resilient utilities
2.3  We will secure growth by using sustainable resources, renewable energy and green transport

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Technical & 
Environment Department
Shared bicycle scheme
The feasibility of a shared bicycle scheme is being explored, 
which will offer mobility options to the educational institutions 
and business areas from the railway station. The aim is to 
promote alternative modes of transport that support the 
revised mobility framework of Vejle and act as a catalyst for 
behavioral change. 
Goal: 2.3 + 4.1

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Technical & 
Environment Department
Bicycle parking facilities
We will provide bicycle parking facilities to encourage more 
cycling within the city to improve the health and wellbeing 
of our citizens, support an active lifestyle, and reduce 
traffic congestion.
Goal: 2.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Explore the use of autonomous vehicles
We want to explore opportunities and technologies for 
autonomous vehicles by leveraging the knowledge and 
innovation within Vejle and Denmark. The aim is to ease 
traffic congestion, reduce energy consumption and decrease 
emissions in the city.
Goal: 2.3 + 1.3 + 4.1

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Technical & 
Environment Department
Achieve energy neutral waste collection trucks
We will invest in converting waste to biofuels to run our waste 
collection trucks, reducing carbon emissions and energy 
consumption within Vejle, and moving towards the use of more 
green energy. If successful, we also aim to convert our bus fleet 
to biofuels.
Goal: 2.3 + 1.3 + 4.1

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Energy optimization of municipal properties
We are continuously investing in energy improvements such 
as building retrofits, demand management and improved 
energy sources, across all municipal properties. This includes 
a wide range of intelligent approaches such as the ESCO 
project for reducing electricity, water and heat consumption. 
In the long run this could free up resources for core welfare. .
Goal: 2.3

79

RESILIENT VEJLEA Climate Resilient City

We will use water and climate change as drivers for the  
development of the city

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, Green Forum
Improve waste collection in housing estates
We want to improve awareness of waste segregation with 
citizens by providing them with information and separate 
waste bins. The project builds on the experience from the 
pilot project undertaken by the Green Forum in 2013 at the 
Housing Association in Nørreparken. This will encourage 
citizens to be more aware of sustainability and create greater 
social responsibility. 
Goal: 2.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, Technical & 
Environment Department
Societal risk evaluation 
We want to develop and apply a dynamic tool and model to 
assess the effects a future urban development might have 
for high risk companies or sensitive assets. The method 
allows for an improved balance between the growth in urban 
development and risk assessment. 
Goal: 2.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, WasteReuse Vejle
Renewal of waste arrangements
We will improve our waste management with a focus on 
recycling, starting from 2016. Vejle has been front runners in 
recycling and want to keep this national position to support 
our long term plan for a more sustainable society. 
Goal: 2.3

Owner: TVIS
TVIS district heating collaboration, to retrofit for biomass 
TVIS is a unique biofuel district heating collaboration between 
Kolding, Middelfart, Fredericia and Vejle municipalities. It was 
established in 1983 and uses the waste heat from the Shell 
refinery, DONG Energy power plant Skærbækværket and the 
waste incinerator Energist in Kolding as a resource providing 
citizens in the Triangle region with an eco-friendly district heating 
network with some of the cheapest prices in the country.. 
Goal: 2.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Education and 
Learning Department
Facilitate the Natural Science Marathon course
We will facilitate a 10-week educational course, where 
students from year 5 and 6 (11 and 12 years old) find solutions 
to scientific problems. This will encourage students to think 
about renewable energy, recycling and alternative use 
of resources.
Goal: 2.3

80

RESILIENT VEJLEStrategic Goals

2.1  We will protect Vejle and turn our water into an asset for urban and social capital 
2.2  We will establish public-private partnerships for resilient utilities
2.3  We will secure growth by using sustainable resources, renewable energy and green transport

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, VIFIN
LADDER  (Local Authorities as Drivers for Development 
Education and Raising Awareness)
The objective of the EU project is to support initiatives to 
increase awareness and promote education among local 
authorities and civil society organizations in Europe. The 
project will enhance European citizens’ awareness and critical 
understanding of the interdependence of the world and their 
role, responsibilities and lifestyle as citizens of the globalized 
society.  http://www.ladder-project.eu/
Goal: 2.3 + 1.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, Green Forum
Integration of biodiversity and community
Use biodiversity and community gardening as a way of 
bringing communities together. The initiative includes a 
working group of volunteers from the housing association 
Vindinggaard involved in a 3 year project in which they 
come together to do gardening, set up an insect hotel, share 
knowledge, host planting days, host apple juice events and 
information events.
Goal: 2.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Smart Natura
This is an ongoing initiative to protect fauna and flora that 
is identified as both endangered and characteristic of 
EU countries. The initiative will develop new co-creation 
relations between landowners, agricultural advisers and the 
municipality. The increased level of co-creation will help to 
promote the implementation of the Natura 2000 action plans. 
Goal: 2.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, Technical & 
Environment Department
Innovative mapping and planning of an overall ‘leisure and 
nature’ network.
We want to ensure our green networks provide the 
community with access to outdoor activities whilst sensitively 
supporting our housing demand objectives.  
Goal: 2.3

81

RESILIENT VEJLEA Socially Resilient City

We will increase social and economic cohesion and create the 
best conditions for future generations

Owner: Welfare Department, Children and Youth Department, 
Labor market, health 
Social Resilience Policy: We will increase social  
and economic cohesion and create the best  
conditions for future generations
The goal for a social resilience policy is to develop a common 
set of values and integrated welfare solutions across 
municipal departments. The leading principle across all 
departments must be a resource based approach as opposed 
to a compensation one to ensure that citizens, are able to 
manage and control their own lives.
Goal: 3.1

Owner: Welfare Department, Children and Youth Department, 
Labor market, health
”Next Practice” Catalogue 
We will gather best practice methodologies from our work on 
social resilience and include it in the ‘next practice’ catalogue. 
The catalogue will hopefully become an inspiration for other 
cities and help spread the ‘next practice’ approach.
Goal: 3.1 + 1.2

Owner: SSP, Children & Youth Department 
‘Who controls the orchestra?’ pilot project in Vejle
’Who Controls the orchestra’ is an interdisciplinary educational 
pilot project in collaboration with the police, addressed at 
primary school teachers, SSP employees, nurses, workers, 
young consultants, and professional social counselors in Vejle. 
The aim is to establish a common methodology for early 
crime prevention and identification of suspicious behaviors.
Goal: 3.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle  Disability Department
The ‘Master of one’s life’ program
An existing program that allows citizens and public 
employees to find new approaches to helping people with 
disabilities. This includes ways to: 1) better achieve their own 
goals 2) champion a greater share of their own life without the 
need to depend on others, and 3) help them become active 
citizens contributing to the development of society. 
Goal: 3.2 + 1.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Disability Department
Ruben’s World
Ruben’s World is a project with the aim to improve the quality 
of life of mentally and physically challenged people through 
the use of technology to make them less dependent on the 
help of others.
Goal: 3.2 + 1.2

82

RESILIENT VEJLEStrategic Goals

3.1 

 We will strengthen social resilience across the municipality together with our 
citizens and businesses 

3.2  We will  make urban spaces and social housing central to community cohesion
3.3  We will invest in Vejle’s youth

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle  
The Flexible Treatment
The flexible treatment program is organized with a focus 
on individual youth / family needs, skills and potentials. The 
program delivers a holistic approach focusing on school, the 
youth and their family.
Goal: 3.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, Vejle Libraries
Set up discussion groups for refugees and immigrants
Vejle libraries will set up discussion groups for refugees and 
migrants on current topics. Discussions will be supported 
by volunteers and sponsored by the libraries. The target 
groups are refugees and migrants who can or soon will speak 
enough Danish to engage in dialogue. At least 10 groups have 
already been set up with 6-8 participants and 25 volunteers. 
The experience will be disseminated through a theme day in 
the library in November 2016 with participants from across 
the country.
Goal: 3.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle  
Strengthen Cohesion: Create new platforms for communities
Strengthening cohesion is an important factor in achieving a 
resilient and sustainable society. This project will create new 
spaces for communities and engage citizens in building an 
integrated and cohesive society. 
Goal: 3.2+ 1.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
West City: Use the West city as a laboratory for 
social cohesion
Vestbyen will be developed as a ‘Resilience Laboratory’ 
becoming a central point for partnerships and communities 
with a focus on social cohesion, green areas, allotments, water 
and flooding. 
Goal: 3.2 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 2.1

Owner: Grow Vejle
Grow Vejle association
Grow Vejle is a community driven association established in 
2013 to promote awareness of the value of healthy and fresh 
food whilst minimizing damage to the environment. Grow 
Vejle provides mobile urban gardens for citizens who do not 
have the opportunity or time to own a garden and locates 
them in vacant land and parking lots. Food growing becomes 
a catalyst to bring citizens together.
Strategiske målsætninger: 3.2 + 1.2

83

RESILIENT VEJLEA Socially Resilient City

We will increase social and economic cohesion and create the 
best conditions for future generations

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Children & Youth, and 
Technical & Environment Departments
Establish the URBACT Resilient Europe initiative
URBACT Resilient Europe stems from the work with 100RC and is 
a collaborative project between a network of cities across Europe, 
including Vejle, Glasgow, Rotterdam, Burgas and Thessaloniki. 
The cities work together to learn and share experiences from 
one another to build resilience. Three topics have been identified: 
Resilient People, Resilient Places and Resilient Institutions.
Goal: 3.2 + 1.2

Owner: The Social Housing Plans
The Stairway Ambassadors initiative
Stairway Ambassadors is an initiative where residents of two 
neighborhoods in Vejle welcome new residents and help them 
settle in their new homes to build inclusive communities.  The 
initiative is part of the social housing masterplan.
Goal: 3.2

Owner: Welfare Department
Investigate Vestergade as a facility for vulnerable citizens
In collaboration with the KFUM’s (YMCA) social workspace 
The Parasol, we have designated Vestergade, a street in 
Vejle, as a space for people with drug addictions to gather. 
This focuses on the welfare of the addicts and functions in 
an open and transparent way so that the local community of 
shops and residents are engaged and can offer support to the 
addicts in a safe way.
Goal: 3.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Disability Department
Establish The Embassy Café 
The Embassy Café is located in one of the city’s popular parks. 
It offers an opportunity for people with learning difficulties 
to operate the cafe and the adjacent ice rink. The café 
demonstrates that everyone in Vejle is able to contribute to 
the operation of the city. 
Goal: 3.2

Owner:  The Municipality of Vejle Education & Learning
The Growth House
The Growth House is an idea for the establishment of an 
overall framework on three sub-initiatives: Højens Garden, 
FoodLab and Eat City. The focus is on promoting social 
cohesion in the city, through communal dinners and cooking.
Goal: 3.2

84

RESILIENT VEJLEStrategic Goals

3.1 

 We will strengthen social resilience across the municipality together with our 
citizens and businesses 

3.2  We will  make urban spaces and social housing central to community cohesion
3.3  We will invest in Vejle’s youth

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Housing Associations
Social Housing Master Plans: Develop social housing estates 
‘Løget’ and ‘Nørremarken’ with possible investments from 
the Municipality and external financing bodies
The social housing plan contributes considerably to the 
city’s cohesion, strengthening local identity and actively 
engaging the local community creating a resilient city. The 
vision for ’Løget’ and ’Nørremarken’ is to be resilient, robust 
and attractive areas that use the local resources to create 
citizenship, security, well-being and space.  
Goal: 3.2 + 1.2

Owner: Østerbo, Tirsbæk Bakker A/S
Tirsbæk Hills
A new housing area is being built next to the very wealthy 
area of Bredballe. This new area will include privately owned 
single-family homes along with rented accommodation, 
to ensure a varied mix of residents. The public housing 
association Østerbo are developing the project in cooperation 
with the private developer to ensure a greater breadth of 
housing supply than usually seen in similar areas.
Goal: 3.2 + 1.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Disabilities Sports Council 
Set up a Council to improve the sports provision for people 
with disabilities and promite inclusivity across all sports.
Goal: 3.3 + 1.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Facilitate group reading sessions for  relatives of people 
with mental health vulnerabilities
This initiative creates group reading sessions to bring together 
the relatives of mentally vulnerable people to reflect on the 
text, own life experiences and start a dialogue. The initiative 
will also help to establish wider and cohesive social networks.
Goal: 3.3 + 1.2

85

RESILIENT VEJLEA Socially Resilient City

We will increase social and economic cohesion and create the 
best conditions for future generations

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Youth Life: Develop initiatives to help the vulnerable youth 
groups in the city
We are experiencing an increasing youth population who 
struggle to stand on their own two feet and are not positively 
integrated into society e.g. the educational system, the labor 
force, and clubs/ leisure activities. This project will focus on 
vulnerable youth and work towards getting more young 
people to complete their education. At the same time it will 
focus on preventing radicalization.  
Goal: 3.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Continue to maintain the ‘Through Fire and Water’ initiative
The initiative started in 2007 is aimed at giving firefighter 
training courses to vulnerable young people from the city’s 
schools aged between 13 and 16 years. The training takes 
place in Vejle fire station and the lessons include first aid, basic 
firefighting and smoke diving. The objective is to build their 
self-esteem, confidence and instil a sense of community spirit.
Goal: 3.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Family and Prevention 
Department; Dagtilbud
Enhance the cooperation between daycare facilities and 
family counselling
We will facilitate stronger cooperation between the childcare 
centers Grønnedalens and Løget Center, with publically 
supported family counselling. The program will allow individual 
families and children to network with other parents, through 
communal dinners and access to advice and guidance.
Goal: 3.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Center for Addicts
Early intervention for families with alcohol problems
The action aims to use early intervention as a preventive 
measure in families with alcohol problems. We will focus on 
assisting the parents and improving the child’s environment 
by reducing stress factors. 
Goal: 3.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle: The Youth Club
Project Grandfather - resourceful mentor for the youth
The initiative focuses on marginalized youth who are paired 
with a volunteer ’grandfather’ who acts as a personal mentor 
and guide to support the youth in getting started with 
education and employment. The project counts about 80 
young participants to date.
Goal: 3.3

86

RESILIENT VEJLEStrategic Goals

3.1 

 We will strengthen social resilience across the municipality together with our 
citizens and businesses 

3.2  We will  make urban spaces and social housing central to community cohesion
3.3  We will invest in Vejle’s youth

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, Save the Children and The 
Bridge Vejle
Active Sports & Leisure 
The initiative ensures that youth in the city, including the 
vulnerable, have equal opportunities in sports and leisure. 
The initiative provides guidance and financial support for 
the youth aged 6 to 18 years in addition to volunteering 
opportunities entitled ‘support friends’. 
Goal: 3.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Culture & Leisure 
Department, the youth school and Værket 
Youth House Værket – bringing together the youth of Vejle
This initiative brings together young girls from different ethnic 
backgrounds to meet and participate in a series of activities 
including creative workshops and cooking classes. Benefits 
include learning languages and facilitating social integration 
of various ethnicities within the youth society.  A similar 
initiative was started by Red Cross volunteers for young boys.
Goal: 3.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, The Production 
School Datariet
Datariet course offering
The production school Datariet offers individual courses that 
contribute to the development of students’ personal, social 
and professional skills. They also help to develop the students’ 
interest in and ability to participate actively in a democratic 
society. Datariet is also part of the national project ‘young 
people and mental health’. 
Goal: 3.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle: Culture & Leisure 
Department, Vejle Libraries, 
Book-start
We want to improve the literacy of children in vulnerable 
neighborhoods by handing out book gifts to children 
and their parents, and offering the services of a librarian 
specialized in children’s books visit. 
Goal: 3.3

87

RESILIENT VEJLEA Socially Resilient City

We will increase social and economic cohesion and create the 
best conditions for future generations

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Strategic Preventive Investments
Research shows that early intervention, such as ‘good 
investments’ result in direct benefits to vulnerable citizens 
and families. We will designate an area as a social laboratory 
where initiatives on strategic prevention and investment 
models can be tested. This could include an increased focus 
on parenting and family relationships or investigating the 
relation between resilient communities and public health. We 
want to ensure that our vulnerable citizens are not worse off. 
Goal: 3.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, Family & Prevention
The AFKOS initiative
AFKOS (Outpatient Parenting Competencies Observations 
and Support) is an initiative that helps parents to develop 
parenting skills. The initiative is targeted at parents evaluated 
by social services as needing additional support to ensure the 
wellbeing and development of the child. 
Goal: 3.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle: Prevention and 
Healthcare Committee
The SPOR 18 initiative
Our youth’s mental health is under pressure. SPOR 18 is an 
initiative that offers advice to young people to help them 
address problems such as loneliness, sadness, anxiety, 
sexuality, stress and others. SPOR 18 is run by counselors and 
professionals trained in mental health. (SPOR = Track)
Goal: 3.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Prevention and 
Healthcare Committee
Health Agents program
The Health Agents program is aimed at volunteers who would 
like to acquire training in health to help others lead a healthier 
lifestyle. After the training, volunteers will be given the 
opportunity to participate in creating health driven activities 
in Løget, Nørremarken and other neighborhoods in Vejle.
Goal: 3.3

88

RESILIENT VEJLEStrategic Goals

3.1 

 We will strengthen social resilience across the municipality together with our 
citizens and businesses 

3.2  We will  make urban spaces and social housing central to community cohesion
3.3  We will invest in Vejle’s youth

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Labor Market Department
Jobcarving
Jobcenter Vejle is implementing a three-year project where 
selected companies collaborate with a target group of 
vulnerable citizens to include them in the labor market. This 
will strengthen corporate social responsibility amongst local 
businesses and create a local labor market that is cohesive 
and inclusive. 
Goal: 3.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Psychiatry and Addiction
Better connected to the labor market
A large proportion of the citizens in contact with the 
municipality’s Social and Psychiatry Department receive 
public benefits. We will integrate marginalized people with 
mental illnesses into the city’s workforce to develop holistic 
and tailored support in collaboration with other organizations.
Goal: 3.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Labor Market Department
Self-supported immigrants in employment 
Jobcenter Vejle has received funds from the Immigration, 
Integration and Housing Ministry to support immigrants 
who have been self-supported in employment, through new 
internships and employment opportunities for spouses. 
Goal: 3.3

Owner:  The Municipality of Vejle Labor Market Department
The inclusive business of the year
We will continue to support the Local Employment Council 
and job center in Vejle to award the annual prize for the 
most inclusive business. The price is open to companies and 
individuals who make a difference to integrate citizens in the 
labor market, especially for people with one or more personal, 
physical or health barriers. The citizens of Vejle nominate and 
vote for the candidates. 
Goal: 3.3

89

RESILIENT VEJLEA Smart City

We will embrace new technologies and improve 
co-creation, efficiency, outreach and inclusivity

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Advanced Smart Lighting: Using the streetlights  
to integrate smart technologies
Smart LED projects is an energy optimization project focused 
on the opportunities from LED and digital technology in street 
lighting. The project will evolve into a city wide project, which 
will create a more energy efficient and improved lighting 
system in the city, and support mobility and safety.
Goal: 4.1 + 1.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Investigate a smart digital parking strategy for Vejle
The Municipality of Vejle will develop a digital smart parking 
strategy, which will include the development of an application 
(‘app’) with features such as pay by phone, and identification 
of the location of nearest available parking spot.
Goal: 4.1

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Investigate an Intelligent traffic management for Vejle
A lot of time is being wasted at traffic lights in Vejle, costing 
hundreds of millions of Danish krone yearly. We want 
to address this by undertaking a feasibility study for an 
intelligent traffic system to understand its contribution to a 
greener, better managed urban environment.
Goal: 4.1 + 1.3

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, and others
Establish the Vejle Open Data initiative
We will make data freely available in Vejle to support the 
economic growth of the city, and ensure transparency in 
the public administration. Opening up the data will allow 
businesses and entrepreneurs to develop new business 
services and business models.
Goal: 4.1 + 1.3

90

RESILIENT VEJLEStrategic Goals

4.1  We will use Smart technologies to create an efficient society 
4.2  We will support youths’ education in digital technologies
4.3  We will facilitate public access to open data to create a digital society

t
r
o
k
o
m
e
D

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Crowdsourcing data to facilitate the 
municipality’s operations
Municipality of Vejle will launch a crowdsourcing campaign 
to collect data. The aim is to give an overview of the city’s 
performance and facilitate response and operations. The 
crowdsourcing is being undertaken via an app allowing 
citizens to provide information such as faults in utilities on a 
map of Vejle. 
Goal: 4.1

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Children & Youth Department
Investigate a crime prevention map
The initiative addresses the need to work comprehensively 
with crime prevention, by integrating data. We want to 
develop a data map as a communication tool with the 
country’s local municipalities to provide a solid base for 
local crime prevention by identifying local risks and taking 
appropriate preventative measures. 
Goal: 4.1

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, and others
National collaboration part of Smart City Five Pack
Vejle is part of a network of leading Danish smart cities, called 
Smart City Five Pack that includes Copenhagen, Aarhus, 
Aalborg and Odense, Vejle. The network helps set the agenda 
for smart cities in Denmark demonstrating that cities can take 
the initiative and boost the development of solutions that are 
based on the needs of their citizens.
Goal: 4.1

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle and Fablab@school.dk   
Digital Inclusion: Provide citizens, youth and elderly people, 
with the necessary support to keep up to date with digital  
technologies
With the project ‘digital inclusion’ we will focus on developing 
solutions to make the citizens of Vejle ‘smart citizens’ and 
part of the digital society. This is includes elderly people, 
vulnerable people, immigrants, small businesses and young 
people, who struggle with the mandatory self-service on 
public services. 
Goal: 4.2 + 1.2

91

RESILIENT VEJLEA Smart City

We will embrace new technologies and improve 
co-creation, efficiency, outreach and inclusivity

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle and Fablab@school.dk   
Develop a digital communication platform for active  
citizens in municipal communities
With the project ‘digital inclusion’ we will focus on developing 
solutions to make the citizens of Vejle ‘smart citizens’ and 
part of the digital society. This is includes elderly people, 
vulnerable people, immigrants, small businesses and young 
people, who struggle with the mandatory self-service on 
public services. 
Goal: 4.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle, VIFIN
Digital Resilience: Develop a set of standards  
to be shared across the council to increase digital  
resilience and cybersecurity
Smart U Vejle provides access to a range of university 
activities, including masters’ modules, training, and research.  
Smart U Vejle is a collaboration between Education 
and Learning, Vejle Libraries, VIFIN and a number of 
international universities.
Goal: 4.2

Owner: Southern Denmark Technical College
Support the Robot Laboratory at Southern Denmark 
Technical College 
Southern Denmark Technical College has established a new 
CNC technology center in cooperation with the Municipality 
of Vejle. The center will include a CNC technology zone, and 
a robot machining center for teaching and/or training. School 
students can visit the center to get training on technology 
education through concept development, programming and 
use of small industrial robots to inspire them for the future. 
The center aims to ensure that there is the necessary skilled 
workforce for the jobs of the future.   
Goal: 4.2

Owner: Vejle Technical College and University of 
Sothern Denmark
Develop energy pilot schemes
Develop and evaluate opportunities to provide and/ or 
support interest in science, energy and technology among 
children on the 8th, 9th and 10th grade in secondary school.
Goal: 4.2

92

RESILIENT VEJLEStrategic Goals

4.1  We will use Smart technologies to create an efficient society 
4.2  We will support youths’ education in digital technologies
4.3  We will facilitate public access to open data to create a digital society

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
FabLab
We have set up a workspace and laboratory where companies 
can experiment with prototypes and get inspiration for 
their product ideas. The workspace invites potential young 
users, teachers, artists who are fascinated with technology 
and, researchers in children as co-creators. This allows the 
companies to text their ideas and develop their products with 
the potential users and experts. Moreover, the companies also 
have access to technologies for prototyping such as laser 
cutters, 3D scanners and 3D printers. 
Goal: 4.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle with Aarhus municipality, 
Silkeborg municipality, Stanford University, and 
Aarhus university
The FABlab@schoolsdk initiative 
This initiative is giving students the opportunity to examine, 
test and design new digital technologies. Students can see 
themselves as designers and problem solvers and not just 
users. Through this exposure, we aim to prepare them and 
give them an insight on the jobs of the future.
Goal: 4.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Children & Youth Department 
The great journey of discovery for the little ones
We want to investigate how the curiosity of young children 
(aged 1 - 2.5 years) can be a driving force of their interaction 
with digital media. Many children are already introduced to 
digital media from an early age, we to investigate what skills 
are the most important so the kids are able to succeed in the 
future, and when we should start to teach them. 
Goal: 4.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Children & Youth Department
The sinking city
Sinking city is a digital learning tool for primary schools based 
on storytelling. The game incorporates social challenges that 
students are required to resolve. 
Goal: 4.2

93

RESILIENT VEJLEA Smart City

We will embrace new technologies and improve 
co-creation, efficiency, outreach and inclusivity

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle Children & Youth Department
Digital – It’s for kids
We want to support and promote digital kids underpinning 
the resilience development.
- That all children are ensured digital skills and are  
prepared to be active citizens in the future Vejle

- That the children develop a level of ‘digital articulation’
- That the digital development does not cause 

social imbalance

- That we use digital media to enhance children’s 

development and place in the community, for example in 
the form of increased language skills

Goal: 4.2

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Digital Resilience: Develop a set of standards to be shared 
across the Municipality to increase digital resilience 
and cybersecurity
The goal for the project ‘digital resilience’ is to secure the 
intelligent city becomes a resilient smart city where the 
technical solutions are well functioning and well protected, 
in particular in the event of flooding or a cyber-attack. We 
recognize that new technologies can create new threats 
and challenge our resilience capacity if we do not think 
systematically about security standards.  
Goal: 4.3

Owner: VIFIN, The Municipality of Vejle 
Participation in the Smart Mature Resilience project
Smart Mature Resilience (SMR) is an EU project developing 
guidelines on resilience assessment and implementation to 
increase Europe’s resilience to shocks and stresses.  SMR 
will develop and validate the guidelines using three pilot 
projects covering security sectors, climate change and 
social dynamics.
Goal: 2.2+1.3+4.1

Owner: The Municipality of Vejle
Update the existing emergency information website
We want to update the existing emergency information 
website to be more user-friendly with a focus on improving 
the interaction between the municipality and citizens. The 
site will also be used to communicate advice and support to 
citizens during any shock events. 
Goal: 4.3 + 3.2

94

RESILIENT VEJLEFoto: Finn Byrum

95

RESILIENT VEJLEREFERENCES

6

Photo: Nils Rosenvold.

References and Acknowledgements 

Vejle’s resilience strategy has only been possible because of the 
inspirational efforts of our contributors. The Political Steering 
Committee would particularly like to thank the following:

Members of the Political Steering Committee
Arne Sigtenbjerggaard, Mayor, Chairman
Søren Peschardt, Deputy Mayor
Niels Nybye Ågesen, Chief Executive Officer
Michael Sloth, Director
Peter Karm, Director
Claus Svold, Director
Kirsten Tønnesen, Director
John Hansen, Director
Jonas Kroustrup, Chief Resilience Officer
Lotte Stensberg, Chief of Staff
Julie Halkier Nilsson, Secretary 

100 Resilient Cities 
Dr. Judith Rodin, President of the
Rockefeller Foundation
Michael Berkowitz, President of
100 Resilient Cities
Andrew Salkin, Chief Operating Officer 
Bryna Lipper, Vice President, Relationships
Amy Armstrong, Director, City Relationships
Vikram Singh, Associate Director
Cristiana Fragola, Regional Director
Jose Baptista, Platform Director
Paul Nelson, Network and Learning Manager
...and others

Members of The Municipality of Vejle’s City Council
Arne Sigtenbjerggaard, Mayor
Søren Peschardt, 1st Deputy Mayor
Holger Gorm Petersen, 2nd Deputy Mayor
Gitte Frederiksen
Kit Kielstrup
Christoffer Aagaard Melson
Niels Clemmensen
Peder Hummelmose
Lars Schmidt
Per Olesen
Charlotte Faber Stech Mortensen
Hans Hoffensetz
Jens Erik Jørgensen
Azra Hasanbegovic
Leif Skov
Birgitte Vind
Dan Skjerning
Martin Jensen
Alex Vejby Nielsen
Martin Sikær Kristensen
Lone Myrhøj
Morten Kristensen
Folmer Kristensen
Lars Aarup
Gerda Hagemann Pedersen
Dan Arnløv Jørgensen
Torben Elsig-Pedersen
Lasse Bak Egelund
Peter G. Harboe
Christa Laursen
Jens Ejner Christensen

Members of The 
Municipality of 
Vejle’s Executive 
Board of Directors 
Photo: Charlotte 
Holm Andersen.
Members of The 
Municipality of 
Vejle’s City Council 
Photo: The 
Municipality of 
Vejle.

98

RESILIENT VEJLEChief Resilience Officer
Jonas Kroustrup

Strategy Partners
Kristian Winther, Strategy Partner, Arup
Jeppe Høj Christensen, Strategy Partner,  
(prev.ICLEI) 

The Municipality of Vejle’s Resilience Team
Ulla Varneskov, Education & Learning
Anne Kristensen, Welfare Administration
Boris Schønfeldt, Technical & Environment
Johannes Gregersen, Digitalisation & Analyses
And Lotte Stensberg, Chief of Staff
Ulla Pia Geertsen, Technical & Environment 

CRO Support Team
Julie Halkier Nilsson, Planning and 
Political Case Management
Charlotte Holm Andersen, Communication
Trine Maria Laursen, Administration

Jonas Kroustrup, Chief 
Resilience Officer. 
Photo: Nils Rosenvold.

Vikram Singh, 100 RC. 
Photo: Mads Hansen.

Co-Creating City 

Contributors
The Municipality of Vejle’s 
Innovation Committee
Vejle Educational Council and 
Educational Institutions
Business and Education Contact Committee
Political Housing Steering Group
Municipal Plan Steering Committee
Forum for Senior Leaders and HR 
in The Municipality of Vejle
The Spinning Mill
Co-creation Working Group 

Climate Resilient City  

Contributors
Henrik Børsting Aagaard, 
Technical & Environment
Lars Buksti, Technical & Environment
Lisbet Wolters, Technical & Environment
Camilla Jørgensen, Technical & Environment
Keld Andersen, Technical & Environment
Ulla Varneskov, Education & Learning
Anne-Mette Agermark, Technical & Environment
Mikael Schultz, Director, Vejle 
Spildevand (Wastewater) A/S
Ulla Pia Geertsen, Technical & Environment
Boris Schønfeldt, Technical & Environment
Paul Landsfelt, Technical & Environment
Morten Smith, Technical & Environment
Kjartan G. Ravn, Vejle Spildevand 
(Wastewater) A/S
Martin Jebens, Costal Directorate
Johannes Gregersen, Digitalisation & Analyses 

The Municipality of Vejle’s Resilience Team. 
Photo: Jesper Lilleris.

99

RESILIENT VEJLESocial Resilient City 

Contributors 
Charlotte Jensen, ’Grow Vejle’
Charlotte Schultz, Consultant, The NOVA School
Lillan Gützmeier, Librarian, Vejle Libraries
Mette Lærkeholt, Vinding School/SFO
Jens Boye Ravn, HR-Department
Marianne Pedersen, Project 
Manager, Active Leisure
Charlie Mortensen, Director, 
Jelling Music Festival
Jacob Madsen, Director, Danfoss, 
Departments in Vejle og Aarhus
Bent Olsen, Director, Artusbyg
Michael Langkilde, Business 
Services in Jobcentre Vejle
Erik Steen Nielsen, Vicar, Mølholm Church
Finn Thorbjørn, Philosopher
Anna Nguyen, Student; HTX
Annie Hjerrild, Student, HTX
Helle Midskov Brynaa, SSP, The 
Municipality of Vejle
Junette Bay, The Fabricators 
Forskerne Mette Pless og Niels Ulrik 
Sørensen, Centre for Youth Research
Signe-Maria Hausgaard, Datariet
Britta Edelberg and Dana Cernat, Green Forum
Sune Jonstrup, Health Department
Søren Holst Jensen, Health Department
Jim Louis Hasselstrøm, ‘Værket’, 
Vejle’s Youth House
Trine Rosenbeck, Deputy Director, 
Vejle Youth Educational Guidance 
Thomas Mau, Owner of Architectural 
Company ’Mauhaus’ 
Lene Palmer, Children & Youth

Kim Andersen, IT Safety Controller
Kristinna Andersen, Project 
Manager, Digital Inclusion
Lilly Mortensen, Vejle Libraries
Lisbeth Bjerre, Welfare Administration
Poul Erik Larsen, Project Manager, SMART LED
Mads Bo-Kristensen, Chief Consultant, 
Vejle Digital Schools
Ulla Varneskov, Chief Consultant, Strategic 
Housing Collaboration, Integration & Resilience 

100 RC Platform Partners
Eric Schellekens, Arcadis
Piet Dircke, Arcadis
Nicolaj Mølbye, Veoila / Krüger
Morten Grum, Veoila / Krüger
Xavier Maitrerobert, Veoila

Constructive Criticism 
Steen Hildebrandt, Ph.D.; Professor, Aarhus 
University; Adjunct Professor, Copenhagen 
Business School; and Aalborg University
Professor Peter Berliner, Danish School 
of Education, Aarhus University
Professor Jeppe Læssøe; Professor with 
Special Responsibilities, Danish School 
of Education, Aarhus University

Internal Working Group
Marianne Jacobsen, Budget & Finance
Marie Stenkjær Hoskins, Family and 
Disability Department Children & Youth
Birthe Pors, Health Department
Mikkel Dragmose-Hansen, Innovation 
and Entrepreneurship
Sara Louise Aabling, Culture & Leisure
Bent Iversen, Job and Education
Lars Kastberg Jensen, Climate 
& Local Communities 

Smart City

Contributors and Working Group
Anne Dyrberg, Project Manager, 
Open Data Vejle
Boris Schønfeldt, Technical & Environment
Gitte Karring, Communication
Jacob Knudsen, Knowledge 
Centre for Integration
Jette Vindum, Smart City Coordinator 
for Technical & Environment

Special thanks to Vejle “enthusiasts” for their 
dedicated work on the resilience strategy
Jørgen Andersen, CEO, Green Tech Centre
Charlotte Virkelyst, Chairman, ’Grow Vejle’
Trine Rosenbeck, Deputy Director, 
Vejle Youth Educational Guidance
Rafel Shamri, Student, Winner of The 
European Citizenship Prize 2015
Jacob Knudsen, Development Consultant, VIFIN
Villy Nielsen, Volunteer, ‘The Data Living Room’
Ana Catarina Cabral, Lab Manager, FabLab

100

RESILIENT VEJLEMikael Schultz, Director, Vejle 
Spildevand (Wastewater) A/S

Development of the Strategy Document

The Municipality of Vejle 
Jonas Kroustrup
Julie Halkier Nilsson
The Executive Board of Directors
Political Steering Group 
 
Strategy Partner Arup
Paula Kirk
Kristian Winther
Natasha Schlichtkrull
Dima Zogheib
Laura Frost
City Resilience Framework 
www.100resilientcities.org/
resilience#/-_Yz45NTM3NSdpPTEocz5j/ 

Graphic Design
Charlotte Svensson, Arup
Charlotte Holm Andersen, The 
Municipality of Vejle
Kristian Winther, Arup

Photos/ illustrations
100 Resilient Cities
Nils Rosenvold
Mads Fjeldsø Christensen
Simon Jeppesen
Torsten Frøstrup
Jonas Normann
Finn Byrum
Johannes Gregersen
Ulla Varneskov
Mads Hansen
Søren Nellemann
Charlotte Holm Andersen
Jesper Lilleris
Jonas Kroustrup
Resilient Rotterdam
CrossMind Marketing Bureau
VIFIN
Communication, The Municipality of Vejle
Vejle Museums
Thomas Møvig
Gitte Karring

Jacob Knudsen
Southern Denmark Technical College 
AAB
TREFOR
Peder Erichsen, The Technical Group
Colourbox
Denmark’s Digital Ortophoto, COWI
Rieke Koskamp

Print 
Digitalhuset, Skomagervej 6, 7100 Vejle

People who inspired us 
Niels Johan Juhl Jensen, Concept 
Designer and Advisor
Jeppe Høj Christensen, prev. ICLEI 
and Chora Connection
Mads Randbøll Wolff, prev. Chora Connection
Magnus Quant, Resilient Regions
Chiara Camponeschi, Enabling City
Aarhus School of Architecture and 
Professor Walter Unterrainer
Henning Boye Larsen, Professor, 
Technical University Denmark
Wayne Feiden, Director of 
Planning and Sustainability, City of 
Northampton, Massachusetts
Tor Nørretranders, Non-fictional Author
Arnoud Molenaar, Chief Resilience 
Officer, Rotterdam
Jeff P. Herbert, Chief Resilience 
Officer, New Orleans
...and others

A special thanks
Finally, a special thanks to Ib Jespersgaard 
and Elizabeth Gregersen from VIFIN in The 
Municipality of Vejle, who took the initiative to 
co-ordinate Vejle’s successful application for 
100 Resilient Cities. 

 Elizabeth 

Gregersen

101

RESILIENT VEJLE