THE STRATEGIC 

PLAN FOR 

TEL AVIV-YAFO

City Resilience / June 2019

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

THE STRATEGIC PLAN 
FOR TEL AVIV-YAFO

City Resilience / June 2019

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

2

3

The Resilience Plan for Tel Aviv-Yafo, now presented to you, deals with 
these issues and offers solutions that link residents, local businesses, 
and local infrastructures. These links seek to increase the trust between 
different groups and create new social and economic opportunities, while 
also improving our residents' quality of life.

The current plan is part of Tel Aviv-Yafo's activities as a member of 
the 100 Resilient Cities global network, which was established by the 
Rockefeller Foundation. The preparation of the plan and the update of 
the City Vision - the city's strategic plan - were processes that went 
hand in hand. Essentially, the Resilience Plan is an integral part of the 
strategic plan and specifies the future steps the city will take to fulfill 
its critical tasks in the coming years.

The programs and projects that are presented here were formulated 
using a 'participatory governance' approach. Accordingly, they involve 
residents, companies, researchers, and outside partners, and by doing 
so, facilitate joint efforts to meet the different challenges from which 
growth and prosperity can then be derived.

First and foremost, this plan is intended for the residents of Tel Aviv-Yafo 
because they are the ones who will be building the city's resilience. In 
the program, we have suggested novel ways of thinking and feasible 
proposals that aim to create opportunities and infrastructures for 
training, improved access, involvement, and connections between 
population groups and communities – in standard times and in times 
of emergency.

Our goal, therefore, is to form links between people and agencies and 
have them work together – innovatively and skillfully – to address the 
pressing challenges faced by Tel Aviv-Yafo while improving the quality 
of life of the city's residents and visitors in both the short and long term. 

I extend my heartfelt thanks to all those who were partners in preparing 
and formulating the plan. I wish to thank the hundreds of residents who 
participated in the process, Efrat Makin Knafo – the Chief Resilience 
Officer, the various municipal departments that were involved, and the 
professional consultants who facilitated their work.

Ron Huldai
Mayor of the Tel Aviv-Yafo Municipality

Greetings from the Mayor

At the beginning of the 20th century, a group of 'dreamers' founded the 
first Hebrew city. The existential need to find a solution to the harsh 
living conditions in Yafo also played a role in the pioneering and ambitious 
dream shared by the founding group. The overcrowding, the filth, and 
the government boycott spurred those 66 families to stand up and take 
action to deal with the shocks and stresses adversely affecting them.

Today, 110 years after its founding, Tel Aviv-Yafo is the hub of the 
largest and most densely populated metropolitan area in the country 
that developed around it. Furthermore, the city serves as the financial 
and cultural center of the State of Israel. Coupled with the underlying 
tension that has characterized the city since its early days – between 
its centrality and the quality of life of its residents - the current reality 
and the processes that our society is undergoing pose new challenges 
to us that necessitate advance and responsible preparations. We are 
addressing them in the spirit imparted to us by the city's founding 
fathers, through pioneering and creative thinking, because now, just 
like then, Tel Aviv-Yafo still has to be at the forefront and pave the way 
in all that concerns urbanism in the State of Israel.

The shift made by most people around the world from rural areas to 
urban areas and the massive global migrations are creating a complex 
reality. The need to cope with challenges such as overcrowding and 
pressures on physical resources, multiculturalism and immigration crises, 
the cost of living, economic disparities, social segregation, a sense of 
alienation, limited access to services and extreme climate changes, to 
mention a few, is at the core of all urban efforts and therefore puts the 
city on center stage.

Photo: Dana Friedlander

Executive SummaryResilience Plan4

5

Greetings from the Director General

The greatness of a city is measured not only by its present nature 
and conduct but also, to a significant degree, by its readiness for the 
challenges that are likely to come its way in the future. In Tel Aviv-Yafo, 
we identified the need to prepare for the future as early as two decades 
ago, when we formed a strategy team that drafted the City Vision.

We are proud that Tel Aviv-Yafo was chosen about two years ago to 
be a member of the 100 Resilient Cities Network, pioneered by the 
Rockefeller Foundation. This has led to a fantastic global collaboration 
between the cities in the network and our municipality, including the 
formulation of a comprehensive and workable strategic plan. The plan 
affects and pertains to each one of the city's residents, and primarily 
its disadvantaged population groups. 

The current plan suggests more than a long-term strategy. It is also a 
detailed, hands-on plan that translates the City Vision into courses of 
action, in addition to presenting actual projects that the municipality 
intends to implement in both the short and long term.

Tel Aviv-Yafo has been and still is, a critical junction that brings together 
different cultures and populations. It is also a melting pot of religions and 
various ethnic groups that coexist with mutual respect and tolerance. 
This intricacy is well reflected in the city's present cultural wealth, in 
its sense of pride, and in the unique identity of the city's residents.

Its resilience is what makes Tel Aviv-Yafo special. This city is vibrant, 
energized and changing, a nonstop city, a city for all its residents. Its 
strength and resilience rely not only on its well-to-do residents but 
rather on the understanding that the integration and encouragement 

of disadvantaged population groups are the keys to the city's genuine 
and deep-rooted resilience. 

Striving for social justice is a value that a diverse city must be committed 
to, a city that espouses social inclusion like Tel Aviv-Yafo. The aspiration 
to achieve equal opportunities and reduce disparities helps maximize 
the potential inherent in the city's residents, leads to prosperity and 
growth, and contributes to the city's social and economic resilience.

As a leading city, we must consolidate our efforts to pass on a legacy 
to the next generations and jointly create a new roadmap for the city's 
continued development. Our participation in the 100 Resilient Cities 
Network offers us an opportunity to be part of a global community of 
cities and people, and develop a holistic strategy for the city's future.

Tel Aviv-Yafo has acted, acts and will continue to operate with 
determination to strengthen urban resilience for the benefit of its 
residents, as well as all citizens of the State of Israel and the generations 
to come.

Menahem Leibe  
Director General of the Tel Aviv-Yafo Municipality

Photo: Shai Pal, unsplash

Executive SummaryResilience Plan6

7

Greetings from the President of 100 Resilient Cities 
(pioneered by the Rockefeller foundation)

On behalf of 100 Resilient Cities, it is with great pleasure that I write 
to commemorate the release of the Tel Aviv-Yafo Resilience Strategy. 
This strategy represents a collaborative and pioneering effort over the 
past two years and will guide the resilient development of the city over 
many years to come.  

From the beginning of our partnership, 100RC and Tel Aviv-Yafo agreed 
that resilience building in this city must focus on human vulnerabilities, 
and tangible solutions to address those vulnerabilities. We also aimed 
to convene the expertise of our global network to bring best-in-class 
solutions from the world’s leading cities to Tel Aviv-Yafo, and vice versa. 

Today, we have reached a significant milestone. Our work to develop 
and mature the Tel Aviv-Yafo strategic plan has resulted in a set of 
outstanding resilience projects that are clearly defined and actionable. 
These projects include developing a holistic concept for the city’s 
southern coastline, as well as a deliberate focus on Yafo with targeted 
interventions.  This effort has also forged together new connections 
through our global network and the Resilience Accelerator program, 
partnering with 100RC and Columbia University, and in September 2018, 
Tel Aviv-Yafo signed a Memorandum Of Understanding with the city 
of Thessaloniki to collaborate around resilient coastline development.

These successes would not have been possible without the support 
of Mayor Huldai and the close collaboration of the General Manager, 
Menahem Leiba, who have continually challenged us and set the strategic 
direction of our work.  Their vision has enabled the Chief Resilience 
Officer, Efrat Makin-Knafo and her team, to lead the development of 
the strategy, the first of its kind in Israel. 

By identifying the gaps in existing plans and engaging stakeholders in 
an inclusive manner that has broken down silos between people and 
processes, our partnership with Tel Aviv-Yafo has made a highly capable 
city even more prepared for the future. 

We look forward to our continued partnership with Tel Aviv-Yafo in 
implementation and beyond, and toward helping the city build a resilient 
future for all its residents.

Michael Berkowitz 
President 
100 Resilient Cities organization 
(pioneered by the Rockefeller foundation)

There has been a growing feeling in the last decade that we are drifting 
apart and separating ourselves from one another – people from nature, 
old-time residents from newcomers, locals from foreigners, tenants 
from their apartments, women from their security, the city from the 
country, and tribe from tribe. The resilience plan at the Tel Aviv-Yafo 
Municipality internalized this evolving reality characterized by distance 
and detachment, including all its shortcomings. Coming from that place, 
it designed plans whose core involves stakeholders that join forces for 
the wellbeing of the population as a whole.

The present document presents the products of our work, reflected 
in five primary areas regarding which we conducted an extensive 
examination and an in-depth analysis of the current situation and the 
options available to us. Feasible work plans for strengthening the city's 
resilience were also formulated. The five areas in question are defined 
as "discovery areas" and include Development of the Southern Coast 
and Beach, Reinforcing the Trust of Yafo's Residents in the Municipality 
and its Staff, Complementary Economy, Social Responsibility Through 
Volunteering, and Sustainable Communities. This thought process, which 
is still continuing to take shape, led to the formulation of large-scale 
plans and projects which the Municipality intends to implement in the 
coming years. The products presented here are the fruit of intense and 
integrative efforts that entailed a comprehensive examination of the 
needs of the city's residents while taking into account the limitations 
of the evolving environment, processes that the society is undergoing 
and, of course, the quality of the resilience that we wish to attain.

Residents, municipal staff, civil society organizations, and other 
stakeholders joined forces and worked together to identify the city's 
social weak points and draft the resilience plan for Tel Aviv-Yafo. I 
believe that the program offers an opportunity for taking remedial 
steps, in the framework of a broad partnership, to improve our urban 
life. The aspiration that underlies this plan is to become acquainted 
with one another, getting closer to share hardships and hopes, while 
jointly building a city that has inner and external resilience – a city of 
all its residents.

Efrat Makin-Knafo
Chief Resilient Officer for Tel Aviv – Yafo Municipality
100 Resilient Cities organization 
(pioneered by the Rockefeller Foundation)

Greetings from the Chief Resilient 
Officer for the Tel Aviv – Yafo 
Municipality

In recent years, repeated reference has been made to the concept of 
"resilience." Its use has become so prevalent that it often seems that even 
those who make use of it do not fully grasp its meaning. To understand 
the nature of our work thus far and the targets that are ahead of us, one 
must first understand what "urban resilience" is, how that resilience is 
manifested in Tel Aviv-Yafo today, and how it will be realized in the future.

In the past two years, we joined an undertaking whose aim was to 
formulate and put in place processes that can increase the inner resilience 
of Tel Aviv-Yafo, which is perceived as the strongest city in Israel. As 
someone who for years has been engaged in social action, I was moved 
to learn that such a strong and leading city views increased urban-
social resilience as one of its main objectives. Tel Aviv-Yafo reached 
that conclusion because it understood that only a city which sees the 
hardships of its underprivileged population groups, makes sure to equip 
them with tools, involve them, boost their standing, and thinks about 
their daily needs and their needs in times of crisis – can become a city 
with genuine inner resilience for all its residents.

The speed of the social, economic, technological and environmental 
changes that residents experience every day challenges the traditional 
premises of municipal policymakers and necessitates renewed thinking 
that can benefit all of the city's residents. The key to addressing these 
changes is found in our ability to identify the challenges we face 
comprehensively and boldly, recognize the significant problems, and 
tackle them out of a sense of trust and shared responsibility.

Executive SummaryResilience Plan8

9

Photo: Fotolia

Executive SummaryResilience Plan10

11

Preface: Building Trust – Creating Resilience

A report dealing with the current situation in Tel Aviv-Yafo, which was 
prepared as part of the strategic process held in the city, presents a 
piercing analysis of the growing polarization and alienation trends in the 
city1. In Tel Aviv-Yafo, the polarization process, which is associated with 
globalization, converges with historical disparities between the northern 
and southern parts of the city. According to the socioeconomic index2 
of the population in Israel, over one-third of Tel Aviv-Yafo’s residents 
have socioeconomic characteristics that can be found in cities such 
as Kiryat Gat, Migdal HaEmek, Dimona and Nazareth Illit, which are 
ranked in the low and medium socioeconomic clusters of 4 and 53. If 
the migrant workers and asylum seekers, who number around 46,000, 
are also factored in, the disadvantaged groups in the city account for 
about 40% of the total population4.

The polarization in the city derives from the highly disproportionate 
wealth of its high-net-worth residents. Although poverty in the city 
is not much different than in other parts of the country, the affluent 
in Tel Aviv-Yafo enjoy the highest standard of living compared to the 
standard deviation above the national average, whereas the standard 
of living of its impoverished residents is about one-half lower than the 
standard deviation from the national average. The fact that the poor are 
not “that poor” is reflected in the small percentage of the population who 
live below the poverty line. That percentage in Tel Aviv-Yafo amounts 
to 10%, as opposed to the national average of 19%. Having said that, 
the incidence of poverty among families in Tel Aviv-Yafo has increased 
in recent years, from 8.8% to 10.6%.

Apart from the growing separation between north and south, Tel Aviv-
Yafo is a city that contains extremes and contrasts in several spheres. 
The city has a large concentration of extremely wealthy individuals, 
but also homeless people; poor residents, but also gated communities; 
upscale homes owned by the new bourgeoisie who settled in Yafo, but 
also slums and neighborhoods where crime runs rampant; a city of law 

and order, but also grey areas controlled by criminal groups.

The contrast between strength and weakness can be seen in a large 
number of social spheres in the city. As a magnet for creativity and 
a space that offers opportunities that are of global quality, Tel Aviv-
Yafo prides itself on its large population of young adults. These young 
adults could be a powerful resource that is available to the city, but 
the high cost of living is driving them out and eroding the middle class. 
Consequently, Tel Aviv-Yafo faces a real danger that could lead to it 
losing its unique and diverse human capital, which would turn the city 
into a homogeneous and sterile place.

One of the guarantees for high urban resilience is the trust that residents 
have in each other, their ability to rely on their neighbors, and their 
confidence in local institutions. Being connected and public participation 
are not only targets of the resilience plan, but also its principles of 
operation – the program was created by linking the municipal strategic 
plan with the action framework of 100 Resilient Cities. The plan’s action 
channels were determined in a wide-ranging process, which involved 
various stakeholders both inside and outside the Municipality. These 
links are the milestones for improving and reinforcing the trusting 
relationships in the city, thanks to which it will be possible to ensure Tel 
Aviv-Yafo’s ability to deal with crises and contain stresses and challenges 
faced by the city and its residents. The milestones are achieved through 
workable projects in those places where trust and urban resilience have 
been compromised.

In the course of an extensive participatory process, we conducted 
research, we weighed options, we listened, and we held conversations 
– based on which achievement goals for implementation under the urban 
resilience plan were formulated while addressing four key questions:

 Hasson, S. “Society and Community Sphere, Report Pertaining to the Current Situation,” Strategic Plan for Tel Aviv-Yafo, Tel Aviv-Yafo Municipality, 2017.
1 
2  The socioeconomic index of the population in Israel characterizes the population’s socioeconomic status, categorizes the population according to different 
geographical divisions, and ranks the local authorities in Israel according to clusters. This index is comprised of three different indices that are meant to reflect the 
socioeconomic index of the population according to different geographical units: a national cluster, an intracity cluster and a national cluster for statistical regions.
3  This comparison relies on an analysis made by the Center for Economic and Social Research, which examined whether the city’s residents with lower 
socioeconomic status have socioeconomic characteristics that are similar to those found in other cities in Israel that are considered relatively weak. For more on this 
subject, see page 28 in the report The Socioeconomic Ranking of Tel Aviv-Yafo, 2013 [Hebrew].
4 

 The Center for Economic and Social Research, The Socioeconomic Ranking of Tel Aviv-Yafo, 2013 [Hebrew].

Do residents and the different groups in the city have equal and fair 
access to shared resources?

Does being prepared for crisis situations and threats result in force 
multipliers and growth?

The city of Tel Aviv-Yafo offers an extensive suite of services and 
resources: the Mediterranean and the beach, spacious parks, cultural and 
educational institutions, healthcare services, playgrounds and gardens, 
physical fitness facilities, bike paths, support systems and volunteer 
networks, nature sites, and community centers. The level of the residents’ 
satisfaction and their trust in the Municipality are directly related to 
their satisfaction with the services provided to them and their ability to 
make easy use of those services based on their needs. To build the urban 
resilience network, we began by investigating the following questions: 
What are the weak points when making municipal services accessible 
to all groups/residents, and how can they be improved and rectified? 
What are the challenges that can become opportunities?

Does the city work together? Using partners that come from all sectors 
– broad-based partnerships and networks?

Resilience rests on the ability to work together based on a shared 
responsibility approach, to expand daily networks into functioning 
mechanisms – and when needed – to offer comprehensive and immediate 
solutions to problems. Tel Aviv-Yafo has taken, and continues to 
take, many steps designed to integrate the network approach into 
the operations of the Municipality and its contacts with residents. 
Promoting interdepartmental collaborations, creating mechanisms for 
joint management of activities and services, involving the public, and 
establishing broad-based forums for discussing different matters with 
stakeholders – all these are the initial anchors in the urban resilience 
network.

Is the city aware of and prepared for the changes in its operational 
environment?

Resilience is a direct outcome of preparedness, which relies on the 
connection between recognizing the threats – identifying urban weak 
points – and implementing changes to achieve optimal compatibility. 
When designing the municipal strategy and resilience plan, stresses 
and shocks that could pose a threat to the city were identified. Any 
step that is taken to strengthen urban resilience must prepare for them.

Resilience is expressed not only in the ability of an individual, community, 
society, or system to absorb/survive crises and shocks and prepare for 
changing reality. Resilience is also expressed in the ability to regroup and 
even grow and thrive after a crisis. Tel Aviv-Yafo, which is known for its 
leadership in innovation and progress, bases its resilience on advancing 
the values of equality, tolerance, inclusion, and shared responsibility. 
That is because those values and the networks they create provide the 
impetus for day-to-day urban prosperity and for civic staying power 
during and following times of crisis.

These questions guided us when drafting the resilience plan, which 
seeks to create a space of additional new opportunities through which 
we can produce change. They connect with the urban resilience network 
and create a hierarchy that starts with a small and specific project 
and continues from there to the ties between the individual and the 
community, the relationship between neighborhoods, and the ties 
between residents and the Municipality – aimed at building trust and 
increased willingness to be engaged and assume responsibility.

In the photo (right to left): Thessaloniki Deputy Mayor & CRO, 
100 Resilient Cities Associate Director of Europe and Middle 
East, Tel Aviv-Yafo CRO, Mayor of Tel Aviv-Yafo, Athens Deputy 
Mayor & CRO, Mayor of Thessaloniki.

Executive SummaryResilience Plan12

13

Executive summary

Photo: Ziv Koren

Executive SummaryResilience Plan14

15

About two decades ago, and as part of the reforms it made in the way the city is managed, the Tel Aviv-Yafo Municipality initiated 
the preparation of a municipal strategic plan. The leadership at City Hall believed it was highly essential to formulate a vision that 
would guide their operations. Owing to the constant and rapid changes taking place in the world, coupled with the understanding 
that the city has to address them, a decision was made in 2016 to update the Strategic Plan. That same year, Tel Aviv-Yafo was 
selected to join the 100 Resilient Cities network pioneered by the Rockefeller Foundation and is the only Israeli city that is a member.

Based on a broad and integrative view of the city’s needs, a decision was made to combine and consolidate the update of the 
Strategic Plan with the design of the Resilience Plan, making them a single plan that is a force multiplier. Accordingly, resources 
were pooled, and insights and courses of action were formulated and optimally incorporated in municipal endeavors. A vital 
component of the work process involved stakeholders – residents, organizations that operate in the city, elected officials, and the 
city’s management – that identified the challenges and devised ways to deal with them.

Urban resilience is the third phase of the Strategic Plan. It focuses on five ‘discovery areas’ that were selected from the City Vision, 
all of which have considerable potential for enhancing urban resilience in Tel Aviv-Yafo.

The following three criteria were used to choose the discovery areas (based on the 100 Resilient Cities methodology):

•  They promote cohesive and engaged communities
•  They ensure social stability
•  They advance security and justice and foster economic prosperity – and in particular among disadvantaged population groups

Key challenges were identified in every discovery area, and programs, projects, and platforms were designed for them that can be 
implemented in different time horizons. The aim was to offer suggested ways of action in places where trust and urban resilience 
have been compromised, while integrating work methods founded on broad-based collaborations in line with the resilience approach.

Discovery Areas

Yafo

Developing tools to reinforce the trust between 
Yafo’s residents and the Municipality, fostering 
collaborations, and improving community life and 

the public and social order.

The Southern Coast and Beach

Upgrading Tel Aviv-Yafo’s southern coast and beach 
and leveraging them to build capacities and develop 
community identity among the local population, in 

addition to cultivating and enhancing existing natural 

resources and the environment and improving the 

quality of the public space.

Complementary Economy

Developing and boosting the city’s local social-

economic potential, and in particular that 
of disadvantaged population groups, small 

businesses and local initiatives.

Sustainability in the Community
Encouraging residents to lead a sustainable 

lifestyle to lower the cost of living and 

achieve a better quality of life and resilience. 

Social Responsibility Through 

Volunteering 

Fostering volunteer work as a tool that 

strengthens social responsibility, developing 

social cohesion and solidarity, and building trust.

Executive SummaryResilience Plan16

17

 Yafo

In the past few decades, the Tel Aviv-Yafo Municipality has invested 
considerable resources in Yafo, which in many ways have transformed 
it beyond recognition. Nevertheless, an explicit and consistent lack of 
trust in the Municipality, in the object of its operations and its public 
intentions was voiced in the numerous conversations held with residents 
from the Arab community. 

This lack of trust underlies all aspects of the ties between the 
Municipality and local residents. Among other things, it is manifest 
in the absence of public order, which leads to a precarious sense of 
personal security among all of Yafo’s residents. The lack of trust can 
also explain the relatively low level of cooperation on the part of the 
members of the Arab community regarding many projects and services 
provided by the Municipality.

Additionally, there is a large and challenging gap between the number 
of resources that the Municipality invests in Yafo – by its different 
agencies – and the sense of discrimination and exclusion felt by many 
Arab residents due to those very actions. That gap can create feelings 
of frustration and alienation among people on both sides, and we aimed 
to decipher its roots and attempt to reduce it – even a little.

Part of the alienation draws its strength from an ongoing conflict 
between Jews and Arabs on the national level. However, the municipal 
platform creates an opportunity to put aside a large share of the conflict 
and focus on the residents’ needs – education, community life, top-
grade infrastructure, a sense of personal security, clean streets, and 
playgrounds for children.

In conversations with them, Yafo’s Arab residents indicated that they are 
aware of the enormous municipal investments, the numerous projects, 
and their potential importance. That awareness is, however, accompanied 
by a feeling of suspicion and discrimination (“these projects are not for 
us”, “they don’t listen to us”, “they want to kick us out of here, like in 
1948,” “the investments are in stones and not in people”).

Accordingly, our work focused on steps that the Tel Aviv-Yafo Municipality 
can take to increase the trust that the Arab community has in City Hall. 
The underlying assumption was that greater public trust would lead to 
productive collaboration regarding the Municipality’s projects, additional 
initiatives, enhanced community life, and a tranquil atmosphere in the 
city. Thought was also given to finding new ways of working within the 
Municipality, through higher cultural sensitivity, a better understanding 

of the narratives, and in-depth learning about the unique difficulties 
faced by the Arab community in Yafo.

The hardships of concern to Yafo’s Arab residents are well-known: 
the shortage of affordable housing and a consequent feeling of being 
pushed out, the poor quality of the school system and high dropout 
rates, poverty, the sense of a precarious public order, a sense of 
political exclusion by the Municipality (expressed, for example, in the 
street names), the feeling of not having an impact on decision-makers 
and policymakers unless through ‘cronies’ and ‘advisors’ who draw 
considerable fire and distrust, loitering youth who are not adequately 
treated by the Municipality, and more.

The primary objective: developing tools to reinforce the 
trust between Yafo’s residents and the Municipality, 
fostering collaborations, and improving community life 
and the public and social order.

Targets derived from this objective:
•  Developing the social capital of the Arab community in Yafo, while showing 
respect for their culture and acknowledging their collective narrative
•  Strengthening the normative middle class among Yafo’s Arabs by being 
more attentive to the community and their unique needs and boosting 
their sense of involvement and connection with the Municipality

Proposed plans and projects 
The work that was done included offering a number of projects, all 
of which appear in detail in the Yafo chapter of the Resilience Plan. 
Here, we will only specify the main elements shared by all of them:

•  Strengthening and empowering the normative middle class in Yafo’s 

Arab community and working with and through them.

•  Involving and engaging the public in different ways to gain their trust, 
in keeping with the saying: “nothing about us without us is for us.”
•  Consolidated and integrative municipal addressing of several critical social 
issues (housing, children and youth, public order, community involvement).

•  Rethinking the role of the governance of Yafo.
•  Rethinking the organizational structure that separates the Community 
Division in Yafo from the Community Administration in Tel Aviv-Yafo.

Photo: Fotolia

Executive SummaryResilience Plan18

19

Photo: Sheina Glokman

Proposed Programs and Projects

Aim of the Initiative

Project 

Launching a leadership program in Yafo’s Arab community – 
strengthening the normative middle class

To develop meaningful leadership infrastructure in the community, 
strengthening the normative middle class

Developing a unique municipal plan for the Arab community in Yafo

To provide solutions to the needs of the Arab population in Yafo

Establishing a system to facilitate, help run and strengthen 
neighborhood committees in Yafo

To increase the trust Yafo’s residents have in the Municipality’s 
operations

Hiring members of the community for decision-making positions

To create a two-way connection between the community and the 
Municipality

Setting up an enforcement forum for long-term plans

To facilitate in-depth solutions to public order problems in Yafo

Opening a municipal mediation and dialogue center in Yafo

To reinforce community ties in Yafo

Treating the problem of loitering youth in Yafo using consolidated and 
integrative means

To provide a comprehensive and fitting solution to the severe problem 
of loitering among youth who lack frameworks

Photo: Ziv Koren

Executive SummaryResilience Plan20

Photo: Daniel Klein, unsplash

21

 The Southern Coast and Beach

Over the past three decades, the Tel Aviv-Yafo Municipality has advanced 
large-scale plans to connect the city with its beaches better – both 
physically and socially. However, in the southern section of the city’s 
coast – extending from Charles Clore Park to the border with Bat Yam, via 
Old Jaffa, Jaffa Port, and Givat Aliyah Beach – there is inadequate access 
to and availability of the marine resource. This need is even though 
most of the city’s efforts and investments should be channeled to this 
section of the coast. There is also a need to boost the local population 
and upgrade the beach as a communal asset and hub that fosters a 
sense of belonging and identity among people living in the vicinity.

Out of the 4.5 kilometers that make up the southern coast, only about 
1,700 meters are sandy beaches with convenient access to the water, 
and there are only two authorized bathing beaches.

The primary objective: upgrading Tel Aviv-Yafo’s southern 
coast and leveraging it to build capacities and develop 
community identity among the local population, in addition to 
cultivating and enhancing existing natural resources and the 
environment and improving the quality of the public space.

Targets derived from this objective:
•  Reinforcing the connection between the local community and the 

open space and coastal assets – fostering local identity

•  Realizing the potential inherent in the coast and using it to enhance 
the quality of life of the city’s residents, and in that of particularly 
disadvantaged population groups

•  Equal and inclusive access - environmental, economic, and social - to 

public resources

•  Conserving and cultivating the marine and coastal ecosystem given 
urban congestion and existing and anticipated environmental changes

Proposed programs and projects 
The proposed programs and projects are based on a division of Tel Aviv-
Yafo’s southern coast into five geographical subsections: Dolphinarium-
Charles Clore Park, West Beach, Jaffa Port, Jaffa Slope Park, and Givat 
Aliyah Beach. In addition to these geographical subsections, there are 
two suites of thematic projects that are not site-specific: (a) Planning 
and Preparations and (b) General Community Projects.

•  Public space: making resources more available – increasing the supply 
of services at the beach and along the coast, including improved access 
to the beach and a more extensive variety of available options, and 
upgrading the public space all along the coast.

•  Community awareness and involvement – raising awareness among 
the members of the community and increasing their participation in 
what goes on at the coast, including the development of community 
entrepreneurship mechanisms.

•  Ecological cultivation – conserving and cultivating the coastal and 
marine ecosystem, in addition to raising community awareness about 
its value.

Proposed Programs and Projects

Initiative

Aim of the Initiative

Planning 
and 
preparations

To ensure comprehensive coastal and beach 
planning in the southern part of the city, including 
all its community, physical and ecological elements.

Community 
Water Sports 
Center 
(Dolphinarium)

Planning and opening a community water sports 
center with local community involvement, removing 
environmental hazards, and developing a municipal 
bathing beach.

Charles 
Clore Park

To upgrade the park, while involving various stakeholders 
and, in particular, people who live in the area.

West Beach

To turn West Beach into an authorized beach that 
offers beach services and a surfing center for at-risk 
youth, while involving residents who live in the area.

Jaffa Port

Upgrading the port and conserving its ecological 
and heritage assets, with a focus on involving the 
local community and residents.

Jaffa Slope 
Park

To upgrade the park, while involving various stakeholders 
and, in particular, people who live in the area.

Givat Aliyah 
Beach

Community 
projects

To improve the coast and beach and conserve and 
enhance existing ecological assets, while involving 
the local community and residents of the area.

Involving the community in coastal activities.

Executive SummaryResilience Plan22

23

 Complementary Economy

Similar to other cities around the world, Tel Aviv-Yafo is facing many 
new challenges such as a high cost of living, a lack of social cohesion, 
inequality, and population groups that are being pushed out of the city. 
Furthermore, small businesses are finding it hard to survive, and the 
local economy is shrinking in favor of global corporations. The plan 
recommends using new tools to deal with these challenges and to create 
prosperity and wellbeing for all population groups. In general, these 
tools are referred to as a “complementary economy.”

The local economy strategy – proposes economic development tools 
that aim to realize the real potential of a locale and involve the entire 
local population.

Sharing economy - a social-economic system that relies on the communal 
sharing of human and physical resources.

Cooperatives – are autonomous organizations of people who join together 
to promote their economic, social, and cultural needs and aspirations 
through joint ownership of a venture that is managed democratically.

Complementary currencies and mediums of exchange – a local medium 
of exchange complements the national currency and facilitates the 
establishment of a system of incentives, through which behavioral 
changes can be advanced to achieve social and environmental objectives.

Urban philanthropy – a longstanding strategy that has further developed 
in recent years thanks to new financial tools such as crowdfunding, 
making it possible to strengthen local communities and make use of 
social finance, which minimizes the economic risk associated with 
different projects and offers more leeway.

There are cities in different parts of the world, including Seoul, San 
Francisco, and Amsterdam, that have adopted the sharing economy 
as a strategic tool for urban development. Those cities established 
municipal agencies to form collaborations with entrepreneurs and the 
private sector, manage public participation processes, and advance sharing 
infrastructures. Using a sharing economy, they address challenges such as 
the cost of living, the lack of solidarity and social cohesion, transportation, 
and other matters.

Several cities have successfully introduced complementary currencies to 
achieve public objectives. In Curitiba, Brazil, a local program was in operation 
for thirty years, under which residents who sorted their trash received food 
packages or tokens for use on public transportation. In Ghent, Belgium, they 

instituted a complementary currency system in a neighborhood populated 
by migrants. Under that program, residents can rent plots of land for raising 
crops in exchange for doing different things that benefit the community.

There are also examples of cities that developed local businesses to 
maximize their residents’ economic potential. In Berlin, Germany, the 
municipality, using a variety of means, developed a fashion industry 
in the Neuköllin neighborhood as a way to provide jobs to its migrant 
population. In Cleveland, Ohio (USA), the city government introduced 
a cooperative initiative that created jobs and provides needed services 
and goods to local anchor institutions.

The primary objective: developing and boosting the 
city’s local social-economic potential, with a focus on 
disadvantaged population groups, small businesses, and 
local initiatives.

Targets derived from this objective:
•  Creating municipal infrastructure for integrating complementary 

economy tools.

•  Establishing processes for the collaborative design and development 
of complementary economy tools together with the target populations.
•  Advancing sharing processes among the target populations through 
a pilot project, whose aim is to define a ‘municipal support package 
for developing complementary economy tools in neighborhoods.’ 
This package will make it possible to extend the project to other 
neighborhoods.

Proposed programs and projects 
When preparing the urban resilience plan, a decision was made to 
turn the complementary economy into a municipal course of action. 
After conducting a preliminary examination in the field and meeting 
with focus groups, three possible courses of action were proposed to 
the Municipality. They aim to enhance resilience by building trusting 
relationships and lowering the cost of living.

1.  Creating municipal infrastructure to promote a complementary 
economy – a complementary economy is inherently multidisciplinary. 
To integrate it strategically and prudently, it is advisable to 
establish an organizational foundation that will coordinate 

the efforts, including setting goals and targets, synchronizing 
intra-organizational collaborations, holding training, discussing 
necessary policy changes to support a complementary economy, 
and incentivizing civic initiatives.

2.  Complementary economy tools for use by residents in the 
community – it is advisable to explore the possibility of managing 
a participatory process among residents of the neighborhood, 
which will facilitate the development of complementary economy 
tools that are customized to the local community.

3.  Complementary economy tools that benefit small businesses 
and support business improvement districts – the added value 

Proposed Programs and Projects

Initiative

Aim of the Initiative

of a business improvement district can be increased using tools 
that maximize collaboration between firms from different sectors. 
For example, they can join forces for a variety of purposes: 
purchase of raw materials and other resources, space-sharing, 
logistical management, marketing, and more. Other options that 
are worth exploring: strengthening the community’s ties with 
the business district by holding community activities there, 
sustainable management in the business district based on circular 
economy principles, and examining the feasibility of issuing 
complementary mediums of exchange that can encourage a 
complementary economy. 

Creating municipal infrastructure for 
a complementary economy - an initial 
assessment

To create an organizational framework for the development of this area, including studies in the 
field and preparation of regulatory conditions for effective implementation of complementary 
economy tools.

Complementary economy tools for use by 
residents in the community

To develop tools for strengthening the community, creating social cohesion, empowering 
citizens, and exploiting local resources.

Complementary economy tools that 
benefit local entrepreneurship and small 
businesses

To develop tools that support small businesses and independent professionals, encourage local 
initiatives, identify unrealized capabilities, and local industries that are emerging and creative.

Developing complementary economy 
tools for use by organizations, 
institutions, and agencies engaged in 
public activity in the neighborhood 

To conduct a cooperative process among active organizations and institutions in the 
neighborhood level with an emphasis on Jaffa and the south of the city areas, which will lead to 
the development of tools for sharing, coordinating, and maximizing the benefits of cooperation 
between them.

Shared housing

To promote shared housing options under municipal and community initiatives.

Examination of the development of a 
complementary urban currency as a 
means of incentivizing quality-of-life 
activities

To examine the use of urban currency as a complementary tool to strengthen and promote the 
local economy in the city, as well as to encourage attitudes that would improve the quality of 
life for residents of the city such as social responsibility, and adopting a sustainable and healthy 
way of life.

Executive SummaryResilience Plan24

25

 Sustainability in the Community

The city is growing steadily – it is increasing in terms of population, built 
areas, income levels, and motorization. For example, the population is 
expected to increase from 432,900 residents in 2015 to 535,000 by 
2030, and from 251,700 non-residents who work in the city (accounting 
for about 60% of all employed persons in the city) to around 356,000 
who commute to Tel Aviv-Yafo from other cities. The strains on municipal 
infrastructure and environmental systems are eroding the city’s endurance. 
To address this imbalance, the City Vision proposes a sustainable approach 
that aims to develop infrastructure and mechanisms for improving the 
relationships between the environment, society, and economy in the city 
and for strengthening the community’s resilience. 

It appears that sustainability is one of the issues that unite and shape 
communality in Tel Aviv-Yafo. The city’s residents attach importance to 
the connection between the physical and environmental space, and their 
quality of life and the community activities in which they participate. 
An enhanced relationship with the physical space enables residents of 
disadvantaged neighborhoods to upgrade their living space, improve 
their health, and lower their cost of living. Consequently, sustainability 
was defined as a discovery area in the Resilience Plan. Programs were 
developed for creating infrastructure and advancing a viable and healthy 
way of life by reinforcing sustainability in the community, especially 
among disadvantaged populations.

Developing sustainability in the community will strengthen urban 
resilience by creating space where residents can lead active and 
engaged lives in pleasant and healthy surroundings. This development 
is appropriate for every neighborhood and all population groups in the 
city, without leaving anyone behind. The Municipality is responsible for 
creating these living spaces throughout the city, for all residents, and 
at different stages in their lives.

The primary objective: Encouraging residents to lead 
a sustainable lifestyle to lower the cost of living and 
achieve a better quality of life and resilience.

Targets derived from this objective:
•  Extending the sustainable neighborhood model to all parts of the city 
in an equitable manner, and especially to neighborhoods that include 
disadvantaged populations.

•  Making the public space greener, more accessible, and more 
community-oriented, while boosting its ability to adapt to warming 
and climate change in the city.

•  Improving the local community’s access to clean energy and energy-

efficient alternatives.

•  Improving food quality, especially for children and teens in the city’s 

southern neighborhoods and Yafo.

Proposed programs and projects 
Expand the "sustainable neighborhood" model in Tel Aviv-Yafo: this 
project is founded on the sustainable neighborhood model which 
operates in several neighborhoods in the city. The model will be more 
accessible to disadvantaged populations and will be implemented in 
Yafo and the southern part of the city.

Sustainable living – making the urban space greener and more 
community-oriented: the public space generates urban life, and the 
more pleasant and inviting it is, the more liveable and inviting the 
city is. Large-scale construction, climate change, and higher heat 
indexes are challenging public space. It is warmer and more polluted, 
and it is less pleasant to spend time outdoors. The Resilience Plan 
includes different achievement goals for improving the public space 
and making it greener, cooler, and more community-oriented, in 
addition to connecting it with the urban fabric in an optimal manner.

Local resource production – promoting local production of 
energy and food: a city that produces its own resources has more 
flexibility and resilience in periods of crisis and lowers the cost of 
living in regular times. To build resilience, Tel Aviv-Yafo focuses on 
expanding the local production of energy and food. The Tel Aviv-Yafo 
Municipality has joined forces with other cities in the world to deal 
with these challenges and the Resilience Plan will be integrated into 
existing efforts.

At present, most of the city’s energy comes from the national 
electrical grid and is generated mainly from fossil fuels, namely gas 
and coal. To address the expected strains and challenges associated 
with supplying power to the city, by the year 2030 the Municipality 
plans to provide around one-third of the city’s energy from clean and 
renewable sources.

The inadequate access that disadvantaged groups in the city have to 
good nutrition, coupled with higher prices and growing food waste, 

Photo: Or Kaplan

Executive SummaryResilience Plan26

27

has significantly increased the pressure to provide a healthy diet to 
all residents. Ways to deal with these serious challenges are included 
in the Resilience Plan under “BETE’AVON – Urban Food Policy.” 
Additionally, programs and projects were designed to improve access 
to wholesome, sustainable food, and to raise awareness among 
residents - in particular, those who need it the most.

Proposed Programs and Projects

Initiative

Aim of the Initiative

Sustainable Neighborhoods in 
Disadvantaged Neighborhoods

Extending the sustainable neighborhood model to two neighborhoods: two in the south and Yafo to 
enhance urban resilience in disadvantaged neighborhoods in the social periphery.

Revitalizing Public Spaces

Revitalizing public spaces throughout the city to improve the services provided to the community 
and connecting with the urban fabric using non-motorized transportation and increased green 
coverage.

Resilience Accelerator – Designing for 
Heat Vulnerability

Plan 3700 – A Green and Self-Sufficient 
Neighborhood

Assessing climate change predictions, mapping heat zones and evaluating the vulnerability to heat 
on the public space, and the adverse implications for local groups; designing to improve and cool the 
public space in a way that facilitates a sustainable and healthy lifestyle and optimal adaptation to 
climate change and to higher heat indexes.

Formulating an innovative and green plan for a new city quarter so it will meet future energy needs, 
addressing climate change and incorporate principles pertaining to energy production, management 
and efficiency, ecological conservation, recycling, and reduced motorized traffic, while also creating a 
vibrant and sustainable community life.

Producing Solar Energy in the City

Decentralized generation of electricity and close to its consumption points, achieved by providing 
solar energy in the city in public buildings and through collaborations with residents and business 
establishments.

Energy Pantry

Creating infrastructure for storing solar energy at schools and/or community centers that serve as 
evacuation centers in emergency situations.

Food Production in Neighborhoods

Establishing neighborhood greenhouses for growing local food and training residents how to grow 
their own vegetables and herbs, as a way to encourage sustainable consumption in regular periods 
and homegrown food in times of emergency.

Improving Access to Healthy Food – A 
Social-Economic Nutrition Facility

Establishing a socioeconomic nutrition facility to upgrade the quality of the food served to children 
at educational institutions, develop social enterprises, cut back deliveries, and bridge nutritional 
disparities between different population groups.

Photo: Guy Yechieli

Executive SummaryResilience Plan28

29

 Social Responsibility Through Volunteering

Taking initiative and assuming social responsibility are essential ways 
that residents can promote social cohesion, a sense of belonging, and 
an atmosphere of trust in the city. The latter can be achieved through 
volunteering, which brings people closer together, bridges cultural gaps, 
and addresses social challenges that pervade in the city.

Investing in volunteering is a productive endeavor that has considerable 
social and economic value. Thus, for example, a leading organization in the 
United States, which makes volunteering opportunities more accessible 
and matches prospective volunteers with the needs of organizations, 
reported that an investment of $1 is equivalent to a socioeconomic value 
of $274.

However, the number of volunteers in Israel is lower than the average 
rate in most Western countries. The barriers to people who have never 
volunteered stem from a mistaken image and disrespect for volunteer 
work, and the perceived profile of the volunteer.1

Hundreds of nonprofits and volunteer organizations are active in Tel 
Aviv-Yafo. Through them, thousands of people volunteer for the benefit 
of the community but do not appear in the Municipality’s records. 
Accordingly, the Municipality’s vision calls for fostering processes 
which can boost social resilience and solidarity, while strengthening 
communities through volunteering. The underlying aim is to achieve 
equal opportunities, reduce social disparities, and advance deprived 
populations. 

In keeping with the 'City Vision', this discovery area focuses on developing 
a local policy that encourages volunteer work as a way of nurturing 
social responsibility and cohesion in Tel Aviv-Yafo. The Resilience Plan 
reviews the current state of volunteering in the city by examining needs 
and challenges, and identifying key partners and stakeholders, in order 
to propose a systematic course of action.

The primary objective: to encourage volunteering as a 
commendable tool for increasing social involvement, 
solidarity, and cohesion in the city, while making options 
more accessible.

Targets derived from this objective:
•  Emphasizing the significant social value for the city and the 

Municipality which volunteering offers.

•  Widening volunteering circles and increasing rates and quality: the 
target is to reach a rate of 34% of residents over the age of 20 who 
volunteers, similar to the European average.

•  Including diverse audiences and people with special needs in 

volunteering circles.

•  Defining a local concept of volunteering, which adapts the ‘classic’ 
idea of volunteering by extending it to an urban model that includes 
civic engagement and responsibility.

•  Modernizing and streamlining volunteer management in the city.

Proposed programs and projects
•  Work and management tools – database management, use of 
measurement and assessment tools, mapping volunteering work in 
the city, creating a municipal volunteering map, training networks, 
particular volunteering applications, and standardization to improve 
the quality of volunteering in the city.

•  Special projects – increasing the number of volunteers who come 
from workplaces and contribute to the community, and raising the 
number of Tel Aviv-Yafo residents who volunteer in line with the social 
challenges faced by the city.

•  Greater public awareness – developing a marketing communications 
strategy, public message campaigns, platforms for incentivizing 
residents who volunteer, and holding an annual conference.

1 

 Consolidating Infrastructures to Advance Volunteering in Israel, Policy Paper, The Israeli Volunteering Initiative, 2016

Proposed Programs and Projects

Initiative

Database Management

Aim of the Initiative
Increasing the scope of volunteering and improving its quality using cutting-edge management 
tools (RM) to retain volunteers and manage the relationship with them based on information which 
has been gathered about volunteering in the database.

Measurement and Assessment Tools

Improving the social indicators associated with the mutual trust and responsibility between 
residents by defining and measuring volunteer impact.

Mapping Volunteering in the City

Municipal Volunteering Map

Training Network

Application (Digital Platform)

Maximizing volunteering potential in Tel Aviv-Yafo, based on an up-to-date picture of current 
volunteer activities compared to the needs in the city (making it possible to accurately assess the 
impact which volunteer work has on the city).
Increasing the visibility of volunteer activities and making them more accessible by creating a 
citywide map that reflects the deployment of volunteers in the field, for use by all those engaged in 
volunteering; tangible visibility in all parts of the city.

Enhancing volunteering quality through professional training sessions for residents who volunteer 
and the managers who oversee their work.

Increasing the number of volunteers by making the service available to them and adapting it to 
the digital age, achieved by launching a municipal application that matches the activity with the 
volunteer - with the aim of enhancing the quality of life, sense of community and social solidarity 
in the city by using an up-to-date and relevant platform and infrastructure tailored to technological 
innovations in the city.

Standardization

Improving volunteering quality.

Volunteering – Business and Employee 
Community Engagement 

Increasing the number of Tel Aviv-Yafo 
residents who volunteer, in line with the 
social challenges faced by the city

Marketing communications, public 
information campaigns and creating 
platforms for incentivizing residents 
who volunteer

Annual Conference

Increasing the number of volunteers in Tel Aviv-Yafo, forming stronger social ties between the 
different sectors in the city, creating greater engagement between people who work in Tel Aviv-
Yafo and the city’s residents, City Hall staff (managers and rank and file) and employees from the 
business community and organizations that operate in the city.

Boosting disadvantaged populations by developing volunteer programs and projects among these 
groups.

Developing a marketing communications strategy for the Volunteer Unit in order to position 
volunteering as a critical value in the city, raising awareness about its importance, increasing the 
number of volunteers while addressing the entry barriers, bringing new and diverse groups into 
volunteering circles, improving the image of the city, boosting trust that residents have in the city 
as one that encourages volunteering.

Launching a yearly municipal conference for professionals to raise awareness and position volunteering as a 
critical value in the city; fostering in-depth social, professional, and academic dialogue.

Executive SummaryResilience PlanCITY RESILIENCE
THE STRATEGIC PLAN 
FOR TEL AVIV - YAFO

100 Resilient Cities
pioneered by the 
Rockefeller Foundation

MUNICIPALITY OF 
TEL AVIV - YAFO
100 RESILIENT CITIES

Pioneered by the Rockefeller Foundation

Design: Studio 

Cover Photo by: Ziv Koren

Translation: Marilyn Fefer

Print: Eichut Digital Print inc.

Printed in Israel, June 2019

