PIONEERED  BY THE
ROCKEFELLER FOUNDATION

100

Toitū te marae o Tāne
Toitū te marae o Tangaroa
Toitū te iwi
Healthy Land
Healthy Water
Healthy Communities

1

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesResilientGREATER CHRISTCHURCH“ There is no ultimate  
or end state of resilience.  
But, by working together  
to build resilience to the  
greatest degree possible,  
we can reduce our reliance on  
crisis as a driver of change and, 
instead, deliberately take the  
future into our own hands –  
for the well-being of our  
families, our communities,  
our cities, and indeed,  
the planet we all share.” 

  From The Resilience Dividend by
  DR. JUDITH RODIN  

President of The Rockefeller Foundation 

FOREWORD

Greater Christchurch is a defined 
geographical area surrounding Christchurch, 

New Zealand’s second largest city and the 
largest settlement in the South Island. Greater 
Christchurch contains a population of 428,000 
residents as at 2013. Greater Christchurch sits 
within the Canterbury region, New Zealand’s 
largest region by area, which is characterised by the 
wide alluvial Canterbury Plain that is used extensively 
for agricultural production. 

Just under 80% of the Canterbury regional population 
(and 40% of the South Island population) live in Greater 
Christchurch, emphasising its importance as a strategic 
regional centre and the primary economic hub of the 
South Island. Administratively Greater Christchurch is 
made up from parts of three territorial authorities.  
This plan is a product of our Urban Development 
Strategy Partnership – a collaborative sub-regional 
governance group that includes our councils, local Māori 
leadership (Ngāi Tahu), health board and government 
agencies. Together we have seen that shocks and 
stresses are not constrained by boundaries and that 
resilience building is an ongoing activity on our journey 
into an uncertain future.

Greater Christchurch is a defined geographical area surrounding Christchurch, New Zealand’s second largest city and the largest settlement in the South Island. Greater Christchurch contains a population of 428,000 residents as at 2013. Greater Christchurch sits within the Canterbury region, New Zealand’s largest region by area, which is characterised by the wide alluvial Canterbury Plain that is used extensively for agricultural production. Just under 80% of the Canterbury regional population (and 40% of the South Island population) live in Greater Christchurch, emphasising its importance as a strategic regional centre and the primary economic hub of the South Island. Administratively Greater Christchurch is made up from parts of three territorial authorities.  This plan is a product of our Urban Development Strategy Partnership – a collaborative sub-regional governance group that includes our councils, local Māori leadership (Ngāi Tahu), health board and government agencies. Together we have seen that shocks and stresses are not constrained by boundaries and that resilience building is an ongoing activity on our journey into an uncertain future.Lianne Dalziel
Mayor 
Christchurch City Council

Dame Margaret Bazley
Chair 
Canterbury Regional Council

Kelvin Coe
Mayor 
Selwyn District Council

David Ayers
Mayor 
Waimakiriri District Council

Tā Mark Solomon 
Kaiwhakahaere
Te Rūnanga o Ngāi Tahu

David Ayers, Kelvin Coe, Lianne Dalziel and Mark Solomon

RESILIENCE is a word we have heard a lot in Greater Christchurch over
the past five years. No matter what extent to which we are familiar with this 
word in our day-to-day lives, it is important that we collectively understand the 
concept of resilience. We know that we will encounter future challenges. This is 
not simply about preparing our infrastructure or our built environment and it’s not 
about bouncing back to the way things used to be. For us, resilience will be about 
understanding the risks and challenges we face and developing ways to adapt 
and co-create a new normal. The strength of our resilience lies in us, not just as 
individuals, but as communities and whānau. 

This Resilient Greater Christchurch Plan enables us as city and district leaders  
to work together to enable and empower our communities to face the future  
with confidence.

As a group of leaders we were already working together before the earthquakes 
struck. The Urban Development Strategy (UDS) has as its vision:

By the year 2041, Greater Christchurch has a vibrant inner city, and 
suburban centres surrounded by thriving rural communities and towns 
connected by efficient and sustainable infrastructure. There are a wealth 
of public spaces ranging from bustling inner city streets to expansive open 
spaces and parks, which embrace natural systems, landscape and heritage.
Innovative businesses are welcome and can thrive supported by a wide 
range of attractive facilities and opportunities. 
Prosperous communities can enjoy a variety of lifestyles in good health and 
safety, enriched by the diversity of cultures and the beautiful environment 
of Greater Christchurch.

We see this resilience plan as enabling the review of the strategy to occur with a 
resilience lens and an ongoing commitment from each of us to visible collaborative 
leadership. As we shift from recovery to regeneration, we can restate the 
importance of collaboration; between the city, the districts and the region, Central 
Government, the Canterbury District Health Board and most importantly with the 
many and varied communities that make up this special part of New Zealand.

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

3

FOREWORD
FOREWORD
MIHI • WELCOME

FOREWORDMark Solomon

E topa atu rā taku manu taki i te tihi o Aoraki Matatū, ko tōna reo mihi 
ka tuku atu i te hau ki ngā manawa tītī o Waitaha nei. 

Tēnā tātou i runga i tēnei kaupapa whakahirahira; mā te mahi 
tahi, mā te whirika o te taura takata, mā te taukaea o te aroha ka 
whakapakaritia a Ōtautahi. Nā, i runga i tērā kai te mihi, kai te mihi, 
tēnā rā koutou katoa.

Ngāi Tahu are a resilient, entrepreneurial people who made our home 
in Te Waipounamu (the South Island of New Zealand) over 800 years ago. 
Our ancestors were the first long distance seafarers, navigating by stars 
on voyaging waka from Hawaiki Nui. We learnt to adapt quickly to the 
formidable environment of the South Pacific, growing our communities 
and culture around mahinga kai and with strong adherence to values 
such as whānaungatanga (family) and kaitiakitanga (stewardship). 

Following the earthquakes, our marae opened their doors to all who needed 
support and our tribal organisations fell in behind to co-ordinate further support. 
Individual iwi and Māori collectives from throughout the country extended 
their immense aroha by fundraising and sending us resources. I remember 
the day after the fatal earthquake of February 22 when Ngāi Tahu and other 
Māori community leaders in Christchurch met at Rehua Marae. The Chairman 
of Te Rūnanga o Ngā Mātāwaka, Norm Dewes, approached me and said quietly, 
“Mark, there’s no you, no me, just we?” I smiled. He was right; that’s how we 
moved, and that’s how we built our strength. We continued our work in the 
months and years that followed. This extended to being firm advocates for 
the importance of our environment and today we consistently advocate for 
greater recognition and provision for the wellbeing of land and water resources 
across all forums. Our health depends on the health of these resources.

I want to acknowledge the great strides that have been taken by our city, region and 
nation following the earthquakes in respect of working collaboratively together with 
iwi at the table. It hasn’t always been an easy union, and it has often taken us more 
time to make decisions. But perhaps it has also been easier than some of us 
might have expected and we have discovered a lot about each other. We are on a 
new pathway of civic leadership in New Zealand that is visionary and will lead to 
more enduring outcomes. I am reminded of one of our ancestor’s assessment of 
the Treaty of Waitangi agreement and vision for our future. Matiaha Tiramorehu’s 
words (quoted below) in a petition to Queen Victoria are inscribed on the 
south wall of Christchurch’s Civic Centre, Te Hononga, a joint development 
by the Christchurch City Council and Ngāi Tahu, a home for civic leadership.

This was the command thy love laid upon these Governors. That the law  
be made one. That the commandments be made one. That the nation  
be made one. That the white skin be made just equal with the dark skin,  
and to lay down the love of thy graciousness to the Māori that they dwell 
happily and that all men might enjoy a peaceful life, and the Māori  
remember the power of thy name.

Tā Mark Solomon 
Kaiwhakahaere, Te Rūnanga o Ngāi Tahu

5

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesCONTENTS

CONTENTS

Resilient Greater Christchurch journey 
 
 

The Canterbury Earthquakes – a shock that tested our resilience 
A call to action 

 

Greater Christchurch in context 
 
 
 

History of settlement in Greater Christchurch 
Greater Christchurch today 
Our shocks and stresses 

 
 

 

 

Ngāi Tahu 
Greater Christchurch Urban Development  
Strategy Partnership 
Resilience Advisory Group 
100 Resilient Cities 

Building Resilient Greater Christchurch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The dividend of resilient infrastructure 
Resilient Greater Christchurch – the story so far 
How we developed this plan   
Key influencers in shaping this Plan 
 
 
 
 
 
Our links to the 100RC Network 
Our resilience challenges 
Our approach  
What does it mean to be resilient in Greater Christchurch 
Our plan 
Our guiding principles 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

8
10
12

13
14
15
18

20
21 
22 
24
27
27 

28
28
29 
30
32
35
36
38
40

FOREWORD 

GOAL 1 : CONNECT 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Why this goal is important to resilience in Greater Christchurch 
PROGRAMME 1  Connect people 
PROGRAMME 2  Create adaptable places 
PROGRAMME 3 
 
Goal 1 call-outs 

Improve the quality, choice and  
affordability of housing 
 

   

42
45
46
48

50
52

GOAL 2 : PARTICIPATE   
 
 
 
 

56
Why this goal is important to resilience in Greater Christchurch 
59
PROGRAMME 4  Build participation and trust in decisiong making  60
PROGRAMME 5  Support community organisations and leaders 
62 
64
Goal 2 call-outs 

 

 

GOAL 3 : PROSPER 
 
 
 
 
 

Why this goal is important to resilience in Greater Christchurch 
PROGRAMME 6  Connect internationally 
PROGRAMME 7  Foster a culture of innovation 
PROGRAMME 8  Sustain the vitality of the natural environment 
Goal 3 call-outs 

 

GOAL 4 : UNDERSTAND 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Why this goal is important to resilience in Greater Christchurch 
PROGRAMME 9 
 
PROGRAMME 10  Manage the risks we face 
PROGRAMME 11   Securing our future in the eastern parts  
 
Goal 4 call-outs 

Improve community understanding and 
acceptance of risk 

of Christchurch 
 

   

   

KI TE HOE – LET’S GET TO WORK! 
Implementation 

 

 
 
 
 
 

Acknowledgements 
 
Abbreviations 
 
Glossary 
 
Bibliography 
Photo credits 
 

66
69
70
72
74 
76

80
83

84
86

89
94

96 
100

114 
116 
116 
117 
120 

 
 

7

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesResilient 
GREATER 
CHRISTCHURCH
Journey

Resilient GREATER CHRISTCHURCHJourneyHutia te rito o te harakeke, kei hea te kōmko e kō?

Whakatairangatia, rere ki uta, rere ki tai.
Kī mai ki ahau, he aha te mea nui o te ao,  

māku e kī atu:

He tāngata, he tāngata, he tāngata.

If we were to pull out the center shoot of the flax plant,  

where would the bell-bird sing from?

It would fly aimlessly inland and out to sea.

Ask me what is the most important thing in our world? 

I will reply:

It is people, it is people, it is people. 

 — SIR JAMES HENARE, Ngati Whatua, Ngā Puhi nui tonu

This saying centres around the ubiquitous New Zealand flax 
plant (pā harakeke), a metaphor in Māori culture for the 
whānau (extended family group). Each plant consists of many 
sword-like blades growing like a fan. Fans do not grow singly, 
but together in clumps, their roots are so intertwined that 
they are very difficult to extract. New shoots (rito) emerge 
from between the two centre blades of the fan, and are 
likened to a child protected by her/his parents. If the centre 
shoot is pulled out, the bush will stop growing, depriving the 
bellbird of the plant’s sweet nectar that causes it to sing so 
beautifully. The saying concludes with the strongest possible 
affirmation of the value of tāngata (people). However, it is 
clear from the whakataukī as a whole that people are not 
divorced from their environment, and it is only when our  
most vulnerable are surrounded by their whānau that they  
will grow.

9

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesTHE CANTERBURY EARTHQUAKES –  
A SHOCK THAT TESTED  
OUR RESILIENCE

In October 2013 the City of Christchurch applied to The RockefellerFoundation 
to take part in their 100 Resilient Cities Centennial Challenge. The letter of 
application was one of the first official acts by the incoming Mayor. The application 
envisioned an internal network within New Zealand, so that not only could 
Christchurch learn from what it had been through, but so it could also share its 
experiences with the rest of the world. Our application was based on a desire to 
increase our social capital and bring about real change by embracing participatory 
planning and collaborative decision-making. Our membership would be an 
enduring legacy to the city and the nation. 

The Canterbury Earthquake Sequence that began on 4 September 2010 contained 
four main earthquakes and thousands of aftershocks. The initial 7.0 magnitude 
event at Darfield, 40 kilometres west of Christchurch resulted in widespread, 
although localised, damage. The second 6.3 magnitude earthquake of 22 February 
2011 – centred just east of the city – was one of New Zealand’s worst natural 
disasters. One hundred and eighty five people died. A state of national emergency, 
the first in New Zealand’s history, was declared on 23 February and stayed in place 
until 30 April. The unusual aspect of this earthquake (and the June and December 
events that followed) was their very strong shaking relative to the size of the 
earthquake. The 22 February event produced the highest vertical and horizontal 
ground accelerations (how hard the earth shakes) ever recorded in New Zealand.

Alongside the tragic loss of life, more than 8000 households were permanently 
displaced by land damage, 90% of residential properties were damaged in  
some way and 80% of buildings in the Central Business District have had to  
be demolished. 

7.1 EARTHQUAKE 
4 September 2010

Darfield •

CHRISTCHURCH

6.0 AFTERSHOCK  
23 December 2011

Greendale Fault

6.3 AFTERSHOCK  
22 February 2011

6.4 AFTERSHOCK 

13 June 2011

MAGNITUDE
      Over 6
      5 to 6
      4 to 5
      3.5 to 4
      3 to 3.5

I felt the aftershocks 

were like a home invasion – 
you close your curtains and  
you lock your door when you  
go to bed at night and they  

enter into your house  

without an invite.
LOUISE SWATTON 
QuakeStories.govt.nz

Resilient GREATER CHRISTCHURCHJourneyDAMAGE OVERVIEW

OVERALL INFRASTRUCTURE REPAIR STATISTICS

 

1,628,429 square metres
of road were damaged and needed 
to be repaired or replaced across 
large parts of Greater Christchurch

659 kilometres

of sewer pipes and 69 kilometres 
of water mains were damaged

About 168,000 dwellings 
in Greater Christchurch (over 90%) 

had a dwelling claim

1,100 Buildings

Needed to be demolished in the 

city centre

Waste water

98%

583km of pipe (88%) repaired/replaced
73 pump stations (90%) repaired/replaced

of total design work  

is complete

Storm water

93%

59km of pipe (83%) repaired/replaced
4 pump stations (74%) repaired/replaced

of total construction  

is complete

Fresh water

96km of pipe (98%) repaired/replaced
22 pump stations and reservoirs (81%)  

repaired/replaced

Roading

1,300,000sqm of road (94%) repaired/replaced
142 bridges/culverts (99%) repaired/replaced
158 retaining walls (87%) repaired/replaced

97%

of central city work  

is complete

94%

of the whole  

SCIRT programme  

is complete

Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team performance dashboard July 2016

LESSONS LEARNT

We are 

interdependent 

and need to 

remain connected

Water is 

fundamental to  

our survival

Planning for other 
shocks or stresses 

benefited our 
preparedness – 

pandemic preparation 

helped to ensure 
that there was no 
outbreak of disease

11

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesDr John Vargo

A CALL TO ACTION

It is now nearly six years since the beginning of the Canterbury Earthquake 
Sequence. A time filled with loss: of life, heritage, communities and many other 
things. Also a time of strength. Strength found in a neighbour’s helping hand, in 
emergent community organisations like the Student Volunteer Army, CANCERN 
and the Farmy Army; and renewed hope for our communities’ thriving future 
together. Although some are still battling with the aftermath of our shared 
trauma, and we must stand with them in compassion and solidarity, it is also 
an important time for us to continue building our shared future. This Resilient 
Greater Christchurch Plan is a key part of that future. Earthquakes may have  
been our disrupted past, but our bright future will still hold surprises for us. 
Building a truly resilient Greater Christchurch will create a future where we 
and our children and their children can thrive in spite of multiple hazards and 
significant uncertainty. Christchurch, before the earthquakes, was one of the 
world’s truly great small cities and the gateway to the Greater Christchurch and 
Canterbury region. I believe the Christchurch we are co-creating will be at least 
twice as good as the old Christchurch! It will be different, as we see the rebuild of 
our region taking shape, but a ‘different’ that is filled with potential, engagement 
and shared vibrancy.

This plan is not simply about our built and economic environments, but equally 
about our human and social environments, about our natural and hazard 
environments. Many of the themes and concepts incorporated in this Resilient 
Greater Christchurch Plan are captured in core Ngāi Tahu cultural values, 
including whānaungatanga (close community relationships), kaitiakitanga 
(stewardship of our natural environment) and tohungatanga (building a learning 
culture). It is such holistic thinking that will make the difference in building more 
resilient people, organisations, ecologies and communities.

This Resilient Greater Christchurch Plan is a product of a two year process 
that has involved hundreds of community members from diverse backgrounds 
and cultures. They have been from across our region, including key partners: 
Waimakariri District, Selwyn District and Christchurch City councils, Environment 
Canterbury, Ngāi Tahu, NZ Transport Agency and Canterbury District Health 
Board, as well as our tertiary institutions and Crown Research Institutes. We will 
all benefit from a more resilient city and surrounding towns and districts. In light 
of this shared benefit and shared future, I invite you to join in a shared endeavour 
to build a more resilient, thriving and equitable place to live, learn, work and play.

As Chair of the Resilience Plan Advisory Group and with the support of that 
Advisory Group, I endorse this resilience plan. This is not a static document but 
part of a shared resilience journey. An uncertain future requires an adaptable  
plan and process and that is what we have in this resilience plan. 

Dr John Vargo 
Co-leader, Resilient Organisation Research Programme 
Chair, Advisory Group for the Resilient Greater Christchurch Plan

Resilient GREATER CHRISTCHURCHJourneyGREATER 
CHRISTCHURCH
In Context

13

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesThe ‘Black Map’ – prepared 
by British Surveyors 
around 1850 – shows that 
much of Christchurch was 
waterways and wetlands 
covered with harakeke 
(flax) and raupō.

HISTORY OF SETTLEMENT IN 
GREATER CHRISTCHURCH

Located between the fertile Canterbury Plains and the coast, overlooked by the 
Port Hills, Greater Christchurch has long been an attractive place to live, work and play. 

Māori have inhabited this area for over 40 generations (c. 800–1000 years) attracted 
by the abundant natural resources. Today, Ngāi Tahu express their resilience through 
a strong entrepreneurial spirit, a keen sense of whānau, and an ongoing recognition of 
the essential relationship between land, water and people. 

The ‘Black Map’ – prepared by British Surveyors around 1850 – shows that much of 
Christchurch was waterways and wetlands covered with harakeke (flax) and raupō. 
Since 1850, most of the wetlands have been drained and cleared as Christchurch City 
has grown. 

European settlement in Canterbury dates from the 1830s with whaling stations 
being established on Banks Peninsula/Te Pataka o Rakaihautū. In the mid-1800s, the 
Canterbury Association commenced formal colonisation including the founding of 
Christchurch/Otāutahi as the primary settlement. 

Extract from “Black Maps” 1850 - 1860

Christchurch and surrounding towns have grown over the past 150 years primarily on 
the back of the agricultural use of the Canterbury Plains.

Key

Swamps and low 
lying areas

Outline of the plan of 
Christchurch 1850

Coastline and 
waterways

w
a

i
t

a
h
a
w
a

 

i

 
 

2
1

Land Drainage Circa 1855. Source: Lands and Survey “Black Maps” 1850 - 1860

Land Drainage Circa 1855. Source: Lands and Survey “Black Maps” 1850-1860. 

Image courtesy of CCC

Section 2: Water in Canterbury & Christchurch

GREATER CHRISTCHURCHIn ContextPlan of the City of Christchurch, Canterbury, NZ. 1874. 

Greater Christchurch today
Christchurch is the largest urban area in Greater Christchurch surrounded by 
several smaller settlements which also serve rural areas.

Today, agriculture, food processing and associated engineering remain core to 
the local economy. Engineering, technology and research-based industries have 
grown in their importance to the economy in the past few decades, drawing on the 
strength of tertiary education opportunities provided through the University of 
Canterbury, Lincoln University and the Ara Institute of Canterbury. 

International connections and trade remain important, underlined by the fact that 
tourism has recently eclipsed agriculture as our largest source of overseas income. 
Advances in commercial aviation since the 1960s dramatically reduced Greater 
Christchurch’s geographical isolation and allowed it to emerge as an international 
tourism destination and gateway to the scenic attractions of the South Island. 

15

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesGREATER 
CHRISTCHURCH
In Context

ECONOMY

Age  
Groupings

80+ 

65-79

20-64 

0-19

AREA
Area of  

1403km2

Greater Christchurch 

Urban areas
279km2 

(20% of total area)

PEOPLE

KEY

672,200

11%

17%

566,900

9%
16%

428,000

4%
11%

60%

54%

52%

26%

2013

21%

2043

20%

2068

SELWYN  

DISTRICT COUNCIL

 

-5%  0% 

5% 

10% 

15%  20%  25%  30%  35%  40%  45%

2001–2005

2006–2013

Greater ChristchurchUrban areasChristchurch AirportPort of LytteltonMarae (Māori meetinghouse)Flat land Residential Red ZonePort Hills Residential Red ZoneMāori Reserve LandBoundary line Economy top 5 industries by  number of employees20061 Manufacturing (30,400)2 Retail trade (22,900)3 Health/social care (22,500)4 Professional, scientific and technical services (13,400)5 Construction (13,100)2015 1 Construction (26,800)2 Health/social care (25,900)3 Manufacturing (25,400)4 Retail trade (23,100)5 Professional, scientific and technical services (18,700)Source: Statistics New ZealandPopulation (2013)  428,000Cultural diversity21% born overseas (2013) increasing from 19.6% in 2006. Three most common countries of birth:  United Kingdom  28% Australia  8% China  7%Source: Statistics New Zealand, 2013Māori population  23,565Māori population living in Greater Christchurch, 52% belonging to  Ngāi Tahu.MigrationOrigin of migrants to Greater Christchurch since 2011:  United Kingdom  2085 China  1320 Philippines  1080 India  942 Australia  915 Ireland  867Source: Department of Labour, 2014Population growth and change in Greater ChristchurchChristchurch (UDS Area)Waimakariri (UDS Area)Selwyn (UDS Area)Population growth and  demographic changeSource: Adapted from StatsNZ (2015) NB: 2063 data includes sparsely populated rural  areas of Selwyn, Waimakariri Districts and the Banks Peninsula area of Christchurch.WAIMAKARIRI 

DISTRICT COUNCIL

CHRISTCHURCH
CITY COUNCIL

PEGASUS BAY

Te Rehua 

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

17

OUR SHOCKS AND STRESSES

Being resilient relies on understanding, preparing, coping and adapting to the 
threats we face. There are two broad categories: 

•  Acute shocks are sudden, sharp events that threaten us. The Canterbury 

earthquakes represent one of the most significant types of shock any place 
can endure.

•  Chronic stresses weaken the fabric and functioning of a city on a day-to-day 

or cyclical basis. 

Earthquakes, pandemics, flooding, coastal erosion, storm surge, wind and tsunamis 
are the most significant shocks that are likely to occur in Greater Christchurch. 

Chronic stresses for Greater Christchurch include climate change, affordable 
quality housing, psychosocial wellbeing and an aging population. 

SOUTH ISLAND 
ALPINE FAULT

GNS Science

SHOCKS

Seismicity 
The most recent earthquakes in 2010 
and 2011 emerged from a little known 
and localised series of faults extending 
along an east-west axis across the 
South Island. However, the much larger 
Alpine Fault, which extends down 
the spine of the South Inland, is our 
primary seismic threat. Experts believe 
there is roughly a 30% to 65% chance 
that there could be a magnitude 8.0 
earthquake on this fault in the next  
50 years. 

Flooding
Flooding is the most common hazard 
to effect our communities. Localised 
surface water flooding occurs regularly 
following intense or prolonged rainfall 
events. Ground subsidence caused by 
the recent earthquakes has elevated 
the severity and frequency of flooding 
events.

At a larger scale, much of Greater 
Christchurch sits on a floodplain. 
Major defences protect communities 
from catastrophic flooding by the 
Waimakariri River, but in the future it 
is likely to be coastal flooding, storm 
surges and inundation that are the 
greater threat. 

Tsunami
Seismic activity around the fringes 
of the Pacific represents constant 
potential to generate tsunami. Our 
low-lying and flat coastal areas leave 
us exposed to this threat. Of greatest 
threat are distant source tsunami, 
particularly those resulting from 
underwater mass movement in the 
deep oceanic trench that runs parallel 
to the Chilean coast of South America. 

TSUNAMI MODELLING SCENARIO

M9.5 Southern Peru/Northern Chile

1mm  

 10cm  

1cm 
1m  
Maximum wave height
Modelling by William Power  

10m 

(Institute of Geological & Nuclear Sciences)

GREATER CHRISTCHURCHIn ContextSTRESSES

Climate Change 
The Canterbury Earthquake Sequence 
has informed our conversation about 
resilience, but has not defined it. 
Preparing for climate change was 
already underway before 2010 and 
2011 and its impacts on our region will 
be significant. Warmer temperatures 
year round will extend growing seasons 
but may bring more frequent droughts 
and fire risks. Fewer, but more intense 
rainfall events, will increase flood 
risks but also limit the amount of 
groundwater and soil moisture capture. 
Within our major rivers, lower flows 
will reduce the amount of sediment 
carried downstream and deposited 
along the coast to replace that being 
eroded by rising sea levels and more 
frequent storm surges. Beyond these 
threats, pests and diseases endemic 
in sub-tropical latitudes may become 
established in our region requiring  
new responses. 

Globalisation 
Just as we are susceptible to 
powerful forces of nature, we are also 
susceptible to the forces of global 
markets. Greater Christchurch’s 
normal economic activity is currently 
swollen by the NZ$40 billion (2015) 
of earthquake reconstruction funding 
that will extend into the 2020s. 
Leaving that aside, the externally-
facing economy that draws income and 
prosperity into Greater Christchurch 
is highly geared towards agriculture 
and tourism. In both of these areas we 
have clear strengths (modern efficient 
farming production with high quality 
outputs and unrivalled scenic and 
cultural visitor experiences) but face 
threats and competition from other 
parts of the world. 

Demographics 
Like many developed countries 
globally, our population and workforce 
are aging. The large number of 
people born in the years following the 
Second World War (baby boomers) 
are now entering retirement age. 
This age group represents a growing 
consumer opportunity but will place 
pressure on social systems including 
health, social care and state pensions. 
The loss of this age group will also 
see a loss of knowledge and skills in 
the economy, although this may be 
harnessed by community level action 
and participation. Over recent decades 
natural population replacement has not 
kept up, relying on inflows of skilled 
migrant labour to fill particular types  
of employment. 

Health 
As summarised in the 2016 Urban 
Development Strategy Update, life 
expectancy is increasing across 
Greater Christchurch. Along with it 
comes more chronic health conditions 
including Type Two diabetes, cancer, 
cardiovascular disease and dementia. 
Being obese, overweight or inactive is 
also a cause of chronic conditions. In 
2014, New Zealand was second only 
to the United States in its measures of 
childhood obesity. 

In the aftermath of the Canterbury 
earthquakes, psychosocial wellbeing 
has emerged as a significant long-
term threat to health. The trauma 
of the earthquakes combined with 
social upheavals through moving 
homes and schools has particularly 
affected children and young people. 
More widely, the stress of resolving 
insurance settlements, being dislocated 
from family or community networks 
and the everyday experience of living in 
a recovering city are all taking their toll 
on people.

Housing and  
Social Equity
Loss and damage to homes as a result  
of the 2011 earthquake drove up 
rental prices, left people sleeping in 
garages and cars and contributed to 
an exodus of people from the region. It 
took major releases of land and rapid 
investment in housing over 4 years to 
resolve these effects. 

However, pre-earthquake housing 
stresses remain. The gap between 
average incomes and average house 
prices has steadily grown since the 
mid 1990s leaving a generation of 
younger people forced to rent rather 
than own their homes. Compounding 
this problem a substantial part of the 
rental housing stock, including state 
houses, have seen little improvement 
with a lack insulation and basic heating 
being common with consequent cost 
and health implications for poorer 
households.

The lack of access to decent affordable 
housing is symptomatic of a wider 
social divide we face. Low income 
households are forced to accept poorer 
quality housing, are less able to afford 
healthy nutritious food and in turn 
endure poorer health. They are also 
disproportionately affected by sudden 
shocks and events. Inequality emerges 
for a range of reasons and so the 
responses we make must be grounded 
in equity – tailoring action and support 
to specific needs and situations. 

More information about our 
Shocks and Stresses and the inter-
relationships between them can be 
explored further in our Focus Area 
Reports, specifically Focus Area Report 
3: Understanding and Responding 
to Future Challenges which can be 
downloaded from our web page. 

19

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesBuilding Resilience in  
GREATER 
CHRISTCHURCH

Building Resilience inGREATER CHRISTCHURCHTHE DIVIDEND OF RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE 

In 1997, Risks and Realities:  
A multi-disciplinary approach to the 
vulnerability of lifelines to natural 
hazards in metropolitan Christchurch 
was developed by the Christchurch 
Engineering Lifelines Group. This 
approach was applied to infrastructure 
planning to provide for risk reduction 
and reinstatement of infrastructure 
following natural disasters. Although 
the Canterbury earthquakes caused 
widespread damage, our roads, rail, 
sea ports, airports, water networks, 
electricity, gas and telecommunications 
networks have proven to be resilient. 
This meant that in the hours and 
days following the earthquakes, most 
power, water and communication 

services as well as air, road and rail 
travel were able to function, ensuring 
that the basic needs of residents were 
met. Within Greater Christchurch 
there is a high degree of understanding 
of the resilience of infrastructure to 
earthquakes, but less understanding 
of resilience to other shocks like major 
distant tsunami.

The rebuild of Christchurch’s 
earthquake-damaged roads and 
underground pipes is being carried out 
with a view to the future resilience of 
the network. In addition, the city’s grid-
style water supply network, which does 
not rely on one main trunk pipe, adds 
to infrastructure resilience.

Resilience is also considered in the 
30-year strategies that each territorial 
authority is required to prepare to 
identify significant infrastructure  
issues and the principal options for 
managing them. 

The Natural Environment Recovery 
Programme for Greater Christchurch: 
Whakaara Taiao (2013) identifies ways 
to rehabilitate and improve the natural 
environment through the rebuild,  
and how opportunities could be  
taken. The programme aimed to 
make continuing and incremental 
improvements to the pre-earthquake 
state of the natural environment, with 
no further degradation.

Earthquakes and insurance 
New Zealanders generally hold a high level of private insurance which reduces the 
financial impact of acute shocks. 

The Earthquake Commission (EQC) provides coverage for the first tranche of 
damage. EQC is an entity of the New Zealand Government. Its core functions 
include providing a natural disaster insurance for residential property, 
administering a natural disaster fund and funding research and education on 
natural disasters. All private insurance policies for home and contents include  
EQC cover for loss and damage from earthquakes, natural landslip, volcanic 
eruption, tsunami, flood and storm damage. Private insurance covers damage 
above the EQC legislated threshold. 

In Canterbury, there was a high rate of insurance coverage compared with 
coverage for earthquakes in countries such as Japan, Chile and America. Five years 
after the earthquakes, some insurance claims are still to be settled. According to 
the NZ Treasury’s February 2016 Bulletin, by 30 September 2015 insurers had paid 
out $26 billion. 

As a result of the Canterbury earthquakes insurance companies have changed the 
way they offer residential insurance policies, from full-replacement to sum insured. 
This has contributed to increased cost of insurance. The EQC Natural Disaster 
Fund has been almost exhausted in responding to the earthquakes. This may result 
in a higher cost borne by the government for any future disaster until the fund is 
replenished.

National conversation  
on resilience
As a small nation of about 4.6 
million people New Zealanders are 
interdependent economically, socially 
and culturally. We share a number of 
challenges as a nation and resilience 
is a conversation that is going on at a 
national level. There are a number of 
initiatives that are currently underway 
to build resilience at a national level, 
including:

•  The National Science Challenges  

are Central Government initiatives to 
focus science investment to tackle 
the biggest science-based challenges 
New Zealand faces. They provide 
opportunities for collaboration 
between research institutions, 
business and non-government 
organisations. 

•  The Natural Hazards Research 

Platform is a multi-party research 
platform dedicated to increasing New 
Zealand’s resilience to natural hazards 
via high-quality collaborative research. 

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

21
21

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesRESILIENT GREATER CHRISTCHURCH –  
THE STORY SO FAR

The past ten years have seen a rich foundation of strategic work to build resilience in Greater Christchurch. 

2012

Risks & Realities 
(1997)

Greater Christchurch  
Urban Development 
Strategy (UDS)  
(2007)

Strengthening 
Communities Strategy  
(2007)

Recovery Strategy  
for Greater Christchurch  
(2012)

Greater Christchurch  
Transport Statement (2012)

Christchurch Central 
Recovery Plan (CCRP)  
(2012)

Christchurch City Health & 
Wellbeing Profile 2012

Building Resilience inGREATER CHRISTCHURCHPIONEERED  BY THE
ROCKEFELLER FOUNDATION

100

GREATER
CHRISTCHURCH

MAY 2013
Rockefeller Foundation 
announces 100 Resilient 
Cities Challenge

DECEMBER 2013
Christchurch 
selected

JULY 2014
Chief Resilience 
Officer appointed

SEPTEMBER 2015
Phase One of the 
Resilient Greater 
Christchurch Plan 
completed

SEPTEMBER 2016
Resilient  
Greater  
Christchurch 
Plan released

2013

2014

2015

2016

Land Use Recovery Plan  
(LURP) 2013

Community in Mind  
Strategy  
(2014)

Canterbury Regional 
Economic Development 
Strategy (2015)

Greater Christchurch 
Urban Development 
Strategy Update 
(2016)

Mahaanui Iwi  
Management Plan 2013

Canterbury Regional  
Policy Statement (CRPS)  
(2013)

Council Long Term Plans 2015-2025 (2015)

23

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesBuilding Resilience in
GREATER 
CHRISTCHURCH

PHASE ONE 

PHASE TWO 

HOW WE DEVELOPED THIS PLAN

100 Resilient Cities – Pioneered by The Rockefeller Foundation 
(100RC) is dedicated to helping cities around the world become more resilient 
to the physical, social and economic challenges that are a growing part of the 21st 
century. 100RC supports the adoption and incorporation of a view of resilience 
that includes not just the shocks – earthquakes, fires, floods, etc. – but also the 
stresses that weaken the fabric of a city on a day-to-day or cyclical basis. Examples 
of these stresses include high unemployment; an overtaxed or inefficient public 
transportation system; endemic violence; or chronic food and water shortages. 
By addressing both our shocks and the stresses, we will be better able to respond 
to adverse events, and overall better able to deliver basic functions in both good 
times and bad, to all populations.

The first phase, starting in December 2014, was a consultative scoping exercise 
involving a broad range of stakeholder organisations. Workshop sessions explored 
the shocks and stresses facing Greater Christchurch, the experiences from 
the Canterbury earthquakes and the priorities to improve the future resilience 
of Greater Christchurch communities. The resulting Preliminary Resilience 
Assessment, published September 2015, identified eight resilience challenges 
and opportunities on which to concentrate. 

Phase 2 – the development of this plan – is founded on four Focus Areas 
identified during the Preliminary Resilience Assessment. Project teams were set 
up for each of the four Focus Areas, led by individuals with subject expertise from 
the Canterbury District Health Board, Canterbury Development Corporation, 
Civil Defence and Emergency Management/NZ Transport Agency (jointly) and 
Christchurch City Council. Reports produced by each Focus Area team identified 
key issues, responses and identified actions related to the eight challenges and 
opportunities. 

A long list of over 150 actions emerged from the Focus Area reports. Actions 
included current initiatives with the potential to be expanded, projects in the 
planning stage and other actions that could be developed further. This long list 
was subjected to a multi-criteria evaluation, with filters including specific benefits 
to vulnerable groups, applicability across Greater Christchurch, resilience dividends 
(i.e. multiple benefits from programmes) and resilience qualities. A shortlist of 
around 70 actions emerged from this evaluation. 

The Focus Area reports and shortlisted actions were used to develop the direction 
of this plan. Content, concepts and emergent programmes of action were further 
explored through working groups, meetings and workshops with the Focus Area 
leaders and four key influencers who are profiled on the following pages. 

The outcome of these discussions was the production of a draft plan in May 2016  
which was presented to all the participants in the process for feedback prior to 
this plan – Resilient Greater Christchurch – being finalised and formally ratified 
by Christchurch City, Selwyn District and Waimakariri District councils and 
Environment Canterbury in July/August 2016.

Building Resilience inGREATER CHRISTCHURCHPHASE ONE
December 2014 – September 2015

STAKEHOLDER WORKSHOPS

PRELIMINARY RESILIENCE ASSESSMENT

Resilience Challenges & Opportunities
•  Housing affordability and accessibility
•  Securing our future in Eastern 

Christchurch

•  Understanding risk and tools for mitigation 

(including insurance)

•  Community leadership
•  Building trust between the community  

and decision makers

•  The role of innovation
•  Urban form
•  Community and social cohesion

Exploration of issues using the City Resilience Framework

Health  
and Wellbeing 

Economy  
and Society

Leadership and 
Strategy

 

Infrastructure 
and Environment

PHASE TW0
September 2015 – July 2016

Multi-agency 
working groups 
led by subject 
matter experts

Focus area 1
Participative 
Leadership and 

Governance

Focus area 2
Securing a 
Prosperous  

Future

Focus area 3
Understanding  
and Responding to 
Future Challenges

Focus area 4
Connected 

Neighbourhoods  
and Communities

Action  
Shortlist

MULTI CRITERIA EVALUATION
• Resilience qualities
• Benefit to vulnerable groups
• Multiple benefits
• Resilience goals

KEY INFLUENCERS

Long List of 150  
Potential Actions

Urban  

Development  
Strategy Partners
Local Governance

Papatipu Rūnanga  

Ngāi Tahu

Local Tribal Leadership

Advisory Group
Community and  

Academic

100 Resilient Cities

International  
Dimensions

Feedback

Draft Plan

25

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesEconomy and societyHealth and  well-beingLeadership and strategyInfrastructure and environmentintegrated planningrange of stakeholdersFosters long-term andEmpowers a broadMeets basic needsand employmentSupports livelihoods Ensures publichealth servicessecurity and justiceEnsures social stability,engaged communitiesPromotes cohesive and Fosters economicprosperityProvides and enhancesnatural & manmade assetsEnsures continuityof critical servicesProvides reliable communication & mobilityef ective managementPromotes leadership andMō tātou, ā, mō kā uri ā muri ake nei 

For us and our children after us

 — Te Rūnanga o Ngāi Tahu maxim

TIKANGA NGAI TĀHU (Cultural Values and Principles)

RANGATIRATANGA 
Leadership through  

collaboration, maintaining  

a high degree of  

personal integrity and  
ethical behaviour in all  
actions and decisions.

KAITIAKITANGA 

Working strategically  

to protect the  

environment for the use, 
enjoyment and prosperity  

of present and  
future generations.

MANAAKITANGA 
The expression of  

reciprocity, hospitality  

and care for  
each other.

TŪRANGAWAEWAE
A place to stand,  
a right to speak,  

an obligation to contribute  

to wider community  

wellbeing.

TOHUNGATANGA

Recognising the value  
of experience, expertise  
and the ongoing pursuit  

of knowledge in  

strengthening and growing 

individuals, whānau  
and communities.

WHANAUNGATANGA

Respecting, fostering  

and maintaining  
relationships with  

each other.

Building Resilience inGREATER CHRISTCHURCHDeveloping the Plan was a 
collaborative and shared journey 
involving community groups, the 
business sector, institutions and 
academics. To draw together the 
views from these interests, and 
to reflect different perspectives, 
the following key influencers 
have played a significant role  
in shaping the final content of 
this plan:

•  Ngāi Tahu
•  Greater Christchurch Urban 

Development Strategy 
Partnership

•  Resilience Advisory Group
•  100 Resilient Cities

KEY INFLUENCERS IN SHAPING  
THIS PLAN 

Ngāi Tahu
Ngāi Tahu is the largest tribe (iwi) in the South Island comprised of a number of 
related sub-tribes (hapū) and extended families (whānau).

In 1840, Ngāi Tahu leaders signed Te Tiriti o Waitangi (The Treaty of Waitangi).  
In 1849, Tiramorehu wrote a petition to Queen Victoria. The petition was signed by 
all the leading Ngāi Tahu chiefs of the time. They asked that the Crown put aside 
adequate reserves of land for the iwi, as agreed to under the terms of its land 
purchases. In the 20 years from 1844, Ngāi Tahu signed land sale contracts with 
the Crown for some 34.5 million acres, approximately 80% of the South Island,  
Te Waipounamu. The Crown failed to allocate one-tenth of the land to the iwi, nor 
did it pay a fair price, as it agreed. Following this, Ngāi Tahu devoted their lives in 
the pursuit of justice to Te Kerēme (the claim) to seek redress from the Crown for 
over seven generations, and in 1986 filed Wai 27 to the Waitangi Tribunal. After 
years of negotiations, Te Rūnanga o Ngāi Tahu Act 1996 was passed in Parliament, 
followed by the Ngāi Tahu Claims Settlement Act 1998 recognising the injustices 
to the Ngāi Tahu people and formalising the relationship between the Crown and 
Ngāi Tahu as Treaty partners in a new post-settlement era.

Today, Ngāi Tahu communities (hapū and whānau) are represented by 18 
regional councils (papatipu rūnanga) and one tribal authority (Te Rūnanga o 
Ngāi Tahu). Te Rūnanga o Ngāi Tahu (TRONT) has statutory responsibility to 
manage collectively-held tribal assets and protect tribal interests, while regional 
rūnanga are responsible for local interests. Collectively, all Papatipu Rūnanga have 
responsibility to honour the deeds and values of Ngāi Tahu ancestors and to create 
an inheritance for future generations. This includes traditional responsibilities to 
manage our environment sustainably in order to protect and enhance mahinga kai 
values and socio-economic capital. 

Engagement with Papatipu rūnanga in preparing this plan led to some important 
modifications. 

•  The first was in response to the fundamental Māori worldview that people 
are intrinsically related to their environment, and that resilient communities 
are built on resilient ecosystems. 

•  The second is the wider adoption of the concept of whānau as the primary 

building block of Māori society and centre of its strength.

•  Finally, the importance of establishing and maintaining strong relationships 

between Treaty Partners was highlighted as the means by which the two 
aforementioned elements will best be recognised and provided for during the 
implementation of this plan. 

The core cultural values and principles (tikanga) set out on the opposite page have 
been integrated throughout this Plan to guide and support its goals, programmes 
and actions.

27

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesBuilding Resilience in
GREATER 
CHRISTCHURCH

The UDS Partnership is made up 
of the three territorial authorities 
(Christchurch City, Selwyn and 
Waimakiriri Districts), the Canterbury 
regional council, and local Māori 
leadership (Te Rūnanga o Ngāi Tahu). 
It is supported by the New Zealand 
Transport Agency, the Canterbury 
District Health Board and, from 
2016, Regenerate Christchurch (a 
Government/City Council regeneration 
partnership). The Group also maintains 
dialogue with Central Government 
through the Department of the 
Prime Minister and Cabinet’s Greater 
Christchurch Group.

The Resilience Advisory Group was 
chaired by Dr John Vargo, co-leader 
of the Resilient Organisations social 
enterprise. Membership of the group 
includes individuals from Ministry 
of Civil Defence and Emergency 
Management, Canterbury University, 
Massey University, Aviva, Canterbury 
Youth Worker Collective, Avon-Ōtākaro 
Network, Te Rūnanga o Ngāi Tahu and 
Environment Canterbury.

Greater Christchurch  
Urban Development Strategy Partnership
The Urban Development Strategy partnership was established in 2004 to 
address the challenges posed by the urban growth demands of Greater 
Christchurch, including co-ordinated transport and infrastructure delivery and 
the need for collaborative sub-regional leadership in the face of market-driven 
urban sprawl. Wide public engagement and joint working culminated in the 
publication of the Urban Development Strategy in 2007.

One of its guiding principles is resilience — defined then as “managing risk 
and uncertainty through strategy and implementation frameworks that 
enhance how individuals, communities and organisations respond to hazards 
and the unexpected”. This principle, alongside six others, continues to help the 
partnership frame its debates and discussions about future growth management.

Following the Canterbury Earthquake Sequence, the Urban Development 
Strategy partnership became the key reference body to guide the use of 
statutory powers granted under the 2011 Canterbury Earthquake Recovery 
Act. The Urban Development Strategy itself provided a ready-made, long-term 
strategic land use framework which was used by the government to guide 
earthquake recovery. The Partnership and its Strategy have been critical to 
shaping recovery of our communities and have demonstrated collaborative 
leadership that is both visionary and practical.

A key strand of the Partners’ input has been the emphasis placed on strong 
relationships across different parts of government (central, regional and local) 
and with local tribal leaders (Ngā Papatipu Rūnunga). The direction is that these 
must be cornerstones for strategic resilience-building in Greater Christchurch. 

Resilience Advisory Group 
The Resilience Advisory Group was commissioned to provide subject matter 
guidance, process review input and to identify interdependencies and 
opportunities for collaboration across the range of initiatives identified in 
the emerging Resilient Greater Christchurch Plan. Central to its role was the 
requirement that it provide input into the plan and be available for discussion  
and feedback. 

A key driver for this group was making the plan a living document – a plan with  
a clear direction, but not so rigid as to become irrelevant after a short while. 

100 Resilient Cities  
pioneered by The Rockefeller Foundation
The guidance and international best practice being gathered by 100RC and the 
experiences of other cities in the 100RC network has helped to shape this plan. 
The City Resilience Framework (page 35) helped us to develop our Stage 1  
Preliminary Resilience Assessment, particularly in determining our challenges 
and opportunities. Sharing of experiences with other cities in the network and 
the ability to leverage international insights and expertise has also enhanced the 
development of this plan. 

PIONEERED  BY THE
ROCKEFELLER FOUNDATION

100

GREATER
CHRISTCHURCH

As the remaining city strategies are released, Greater Christchurch will continue 
to learn from other cities and lend them support. An important resource to 
assist in this is the access to the 100RC Platform Partners – non-governmental 
organisations, businesses and consultancies – which provide a global resource 
of resilience building tools and services. As we advance into the implementation 
stages of this plan there is the ability to use services like those showcased below 
to help us deliver action towards our goals.

Trimble provides geospatial technical solutions and domain to capture, measure, 
analyze, monitor, and share built and environmental information to help accomplish 
a City’s resiliency goals and objectives. 
http://www.ecognition.com/essentials

The Streetwyze app helps cities integrate community-generated data with 
predictive analytics they can track equity indicators, identify hot spots for 
equitable development, and predict future trajectories for vulnerable populations. 
http://www.streetwyze.com/ 

The Nature Conservancy (TNC) provides cities with software tools and technical 
assistance to facilitate a standardized, science-based approach to watershed, 
coastal hazard, and ecosystem management, including visualization, forecasting, 
and investment portfolio design. 
http://coastalresilience.org/

Swiss Re provides cities a natural hazard web tool, CatNet, which helps determine 
what types of hazards a city faces, and how often and how badly the city might  
be affected.
http://www.swissre.com/clients/client_tools/about_catnet.html 

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

29

OUR LINKS TO THE 100RC NETWORK

As part of the global network of 100 cities dedicated to creating a resilient 
future, Greater Christchurch has already identified several actions within other 
cities’ strategies, which have close alignment with programmes contained within 
this plan. The identified actions are not a finite list, they indicate shared challenges 
by our peer cities and illustrate the benefits of a global network. 

Resilient Greater 
Christchurch Programme Aligned City

Aligned action within the 
released strategies

1

Connect people

Berkeley

San Francisco

Create adaptable places

Norfolk

Foster neighbour-to-neighbour 
connections to advance disaster 
readiness
Build community readiness 
education and technology

Reinvest and revitalise 
neighbourhoods

Improve the quality, 
choice and affordability 
of housing

Build participation and  
trust in decision-making

San Francisco

Strengthen Housing Now to  
Better Prepare Us for Tomorrow

Semarang

Byblos

Transparent public information 
and governance
Encourage civic engagement and 
participation in decision-making

Support community 
organisations and leaders

Melbourne

Community-based resilience 
compendium

Connect internationally

Rotterdam

Strong Shoulders Programme

Foster a culture of  
innovation

Norfolk

Nurture the city’s entrepreneurial 
ecosystem

Sustain the vitality of the 
natural environment

Melbourne

Metropolitan Urban Forest 
Strategy

Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

MedellÍn

Strengthening of Community Risk 
Management

10

Manage the risks we face New Orleans

Incentivize property owners to 
invest in risk reduction

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Building Resilience inGREATER CHRISTCHURCHByblos

San Francisco

Norfolk

Berkeley

Greater Christchurch, 
New Zealand

Semarang

Rotterdam

  Cities in the 100RC Network
  Cities with aligned actions to the 
Resilient Greater Christchurch Plan

Melbourne

New Orleans

MedellÍn

31

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesOUR RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

The Preliminary Resilience Assessment identified nine interconnected resilience  
challenges. The following summaries distil these challenges and set the foundations  
for this plan. The icons introduced here are used later in this plan to link our actions 
to these challenges.

Securing our future  
in the eastern parts  
of Christchurch
Christchurch’s eastern suburbs were 
severely affected by the earthquakes, 
with widespread liquefaction and land 
damage resulting in the creation of a 
“red zone” where 8,000 homes were 
demolished. The east is also home 
to some of the city’s most socially 
and economically disadvantaged 
communities. The future challenge is 
to ensure community voices are heard 
and considered as significant land use 
and natural hazard planning decisions 
are made.
 

!
Understanding risks  
and tools for mitigation
Christchurch has always been at risk 
from hazards like earthquake, land 
slip, flooding, tsunami and pandemic. 
The earthquakes improved our 
understanding of some, but questions 
still remain on how we assess the 
risks and mitigate against them. 
These issues, and the consequent 
role of insurance in a post-earthquake 
environment, must be considered at 
all levels of community. Insurance as 
a tool has helped the resilience of 
Christchurch by enabling much of the 
rebuild, but is facing challenges, for 
example higher excesses and premiums 
in areas of high risk (especially 
flooding) and the new requirement 
for households to nominate a sum 
insured. Ensuring government, the 
private sector and local communities 
understand the issues is essential to 
engaging them in the decision-making 
process. 
 

Community and  
social cohesion 
Building and supporting community 
networks is key to our resilience.  
The earthquakes resulted in disruption 
to many existing communities 
and has seen a large increase in 
international migration as people 
come to Canterbury to take part in 
the rebuild. International migration 
to the Canterbury region has been 
steadily increasing since February 2011. 
Monthly net migration into the city 
has now been positive for 32 months 
in a row and that annual inflow is the 
highest level since at least 1991. Net 
migration into the wider Canterbury 
region is also at a record high. Of 
these new migrants, Canterbury’s 
Employers’ Chamber of Commerce 
has reported that the largest group is 
likely to be from the Philippines. The 
region needs to embrace this diversity, 
integrate the new workforce into the 
wider community and encourage new 
residents to remain once the rebuild 
winds down. 

 

Building Resilience inGREATER CHRISTCHURCHUrban form of  
Greater Christchurch
Christchurch has a unique opportunity 
to rebuild better: for its urban form to 
reflect the needs and aspirations of the 
community. The city faces a growing 
population and changing demographic, 
significant residential redevelopment, 
and increased housing demand due to 
a reduction in the housing stock and 
immigration to support the rebuild. The 
population of Greater Christchurch 
grew from 414,000 in 2006 to 
428,000 in 2013 and based on a 
medium growth projection is expected 
to rise to increase to 566,900 people 
in 2043. Effective urban planning could 
help mitigate future stresses such as 
homelessness, unemployment, traffic 
congestion, accessibility to services 
and environmental pressure. 

 

Housing affordability  
and accessibility
House prices and rents have become 
more affordable in recent months 
because of growing incomes and 
housing stock numbers returning to 
pre-quake levels, bringing welcome 
news to renters and first home buyers. 
For example improved availability of 
housing and reduced demand from 
displaced households continues to 
push rents downward. Private sector 
mean rents in Christchurch were $400 
in March 2016, 4.7 percent lower than 
March 2015. Annual rent growth has 
remained negative in 2016, signalling a 
correction following strong rent growth 
in the 2012-14 period. However access 
to affordable, good quality, warm and 
healthy housing has always been an 
issue for the people of Christchurch. 
Damage and displacement caused 
by the earthquakes exacerbated the 
problem: around 16,000 properties 
were severely damaged and the 
number of people facing extreme 
housing deprivation has increased 
between 70 and 112 per cent since  
the earthquakes. Ensuring access  
to quality housing is important to 
future resilience. 
 

Toitū te marae o Tāne 
Healthy Lands

Toitū te marae o Tangaroa 
Healthy Waters

Toitū te iwi 
Healthy Communities

Tribal statement of identity

The role of innovation 
To stay competitive businesses need 
to innovate and workers need to 
develop skills to change and adopt new 
technology. In New Zealand in 2015, on 
average, innovating businesses made 
nearly twice as much annual profit 
($3m) as non-innovating businesses 
($1.6m); employed twice as many 
people as a non-innovating firms and 
made more profit per staff member. 

Greater Christchurch is well positioned 
in terms of the education and 
training infrastructure. The area has 
a high quality supporting institutions 
such as 149 primary and secondary 
schools; three university campuses 
and a polytechnic; seven Crown 
Research Institutes; two Centres of 
Excellence and a solid core of high 
tech manufacturing and knowledge 
intensive service businesses. This is a 
good position from which to provide 
innovative education and training, and 
to continue to build an institutional 
framework that supports innovation 
and future competitiveness. 

Understanding the specific impact 
of the technological changes on the 
Greater Christchurch community 
and economy, and then developing 
co-ordinated actions and growing 
the innovation ecosystem, are 
projects noted in the Actions section. 
Supporting innovation and using new 
technology to enhance innovation,  
will create new opportunities and make 
the region attractive to young people 
and migrants.

 

33

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesConnection with our 
natural environment
Ngāi Tahu recognises that all things 
are interconnected and that the 
symbiotic relationship between land, 
water and people is at the heart of 
building resilient communities. The 
development of Greater Christchurch 
has impacted the health of land and 
water, particularly through the draining 
of wetlands and degradation of 
waterways which has seen extensive 
loss of biodiversity. Post-earthquake 
regeneration offers an opportunity 
to improve the vitality and resilience 
of our waterways and surrounding 
landscapes.

Community leadership 
Widespread community-based 
responses played an important role 
in supporting Greater Christchurch 
immediately following the 2010/2011 
Canterbury earthquakes and during the 
ensuing period of recovery. Responses 
included informal, spontaneous efforts 
and organised responses led by the 
community and iwi organisations. Most 
organised responses were initiated by 
existing community groups or leaders, 
with some new initiatives and leaders 
emerging, such as the youth-led 
Student Volunteer Army. The act of 
contributing is key to a community’s 
resilience, however initiatives 
like this need ongoing support to 
survive. Maintaining and building 
this culture of community response 
and connectedness is important 
for Christchurch. A key challenge 
for Greater Christchurch will be to 
maintain and broaden the ‘culture of 
possibility’.

Building trust between 
the community and 
decision makers 
Residents want to be involved 
in the decisions that affect their 
neighbourhoods and communities. 
Concerns were raised about 
centralised decision-making processes 
immediately following the earthquakes 
and through the recovery. Now that 
both central and local government 
roles are changing, the shift in focus to 
regeneration offers an opportunity for 
a more deliberative and collaborative 
approach to decision-making. 
Community leaders in Christchurch 
commented that in the months after 
the earthquakes, the connections 
between organisations strengthened 
and new collaborations emerged. 
Communities felt positive and 
energised by the collaborative ‘new 
normal’ but special effort is required 
to maintain collaboration to a high 
standard.
Experiences from other disasters 
have indicated that recovery solutions 
should be multi-disciplinary and that 
there should be clear links between 
technological solutions and social 
solutions. Greater Christchurch can 
practice a multi-disciplinary approach 
in engagement with people and 
communities and can also advocate for 
the community in work with agencies. 
 

Building Resilience inGREATER CHRISTCHURCHOUR APPROACH

From the outset of the preparation of this plan we have used the City 
Resilience Framework* as a tool to help us define what resilience means for 
Greater Christchurch. The framework, developed by Arup and The Rockefeller 
Foundation, is made up of four dimensions—Health & Wellbeing, Economy & 
Society, Infrastructure & Environment, and Leadership & Strategy—and is further 
defined by 12 drivers of resilience. We used the framework throughout the 
process to assess the connections between our challenges, identify critical areas 
of strength and weakness, and facilitate a comprehensive discussion of resilience 
with our stakeholders. 

In consultation with our key influencers, we developed a more locally specific 
framework to embed resilience in our community through our goals, programmes 
and actions. The success of this plan relies on the ability to facilitate, promote and 
maintain connections between people and increase understanding and acceptance 
of our interdependency at all levels to build people’s capacity to be resilient. 

By using this approach to evaluate and set priorities, 
Greater Christchurch will achieve the Resilience 
Dividend: Instead of investing to reduce 
impacts from a single hazard or improve 
a single metric, the city will make 
strategic decisions to improve 
its overall strength and endure 
multiple shocks and stresses. 
Investing in resilience can 
save money, save lives, and 
build a more equitable and 
prosperous city.

* City Resilience Framework  
developed by Arup and The Rockefeller Foundation

35

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesWHAT DOES IT MEAN  
TO BE RESILIENT IN GREATER 
CHRISTCHURCH?

There are many definitions and meanings of resilience and over the past few 
years definitions of what it means to be resilient have been tested, reinforced  
or changed. 

A community is not  

the co-location of houses – that’s  

a suburb. Leadership is not a position  
you hold – it is a mark of your character.  
And resilience is not being strong in the  

face of adversity – that is stoicism. Resilience 
is about the capacity to plan and prepare for 
adversity, the ability to absorb the impact and 

recover quickly, but more importantly it’s  
about the ability as a community to adapt  
to a new environment, to thrive in the face  

of adversity and co-create  

our new normal…
LIANNE DALZIEL 
Christchurch Mayor

The capacity of  

individuals, communities, 
businesses and systems to 
survive, adapt and grow, no 
matter what chronic stresses 

and acute shocks they 

experience.

100 RESILIENT CITIES

For local Ngāi Tahu,  

resilience is about maintaining 

connections between people, place and 
culture in a way that feeds mind, body and 
soul. It is inter-generational and promoted 

by three primary objectives:

• sustaining the vitality of our natural 

environment 

• fostering stronger whānau
• building meaningful Treaty 

partnerships with civic leaders.

This plan contains actions that support the delivery of the Urban Development 
Strategy Partnership Vision for Greater Christchurch set out in the Foreword 
of this document. That vision was underpinned by seven guiding principles 
Leadership, Partnership, Innovation, Integration, Regeneration, Equity and 
Resilience. The goals and programmes contained within this plan will encourage 
wider strategic thinking about resilience when the Urban Development Strategy  
is fully reviewed in coming years. 

Managing risk and  

uncertainty through strategy and 
implementation frameworks that 

enhance how individuals, communities 
and organisations respond to hazards 

and the unexpected.
Definition from the 2007
GREATER CHRISTCHURCH 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 

STRATEGY 

 

Building Resilience inGREATER CHRISTCHURCHWe are resilient
This plan places people at the heart of a Resilient Greater Christchurch. When 
people are supported by whānau, communities and organisations, collectively we 
form a more resilient Greater Christchurch. For this reason, throughout this plan 
the term ‘we’ is used widely and is intended to be inclusive as we all have roles to 
play in resilience building. 

The success of this plan relies on the ability to facilitate, promote and maintain 
connections between people, and increase understanding and acceptance of our 
interdependency at all levels, to build people’s capacity to be resilient. The icons 
introduced below are used later in this plan. They link our actions to our actors.  

ORGANISATIONS  All organisations have the capacity 
and capability to be effective agents of change to drive 
adaptation and continue to thrive.

COMMUNITIES  As communities we support, 
foster, include and connect people so they are able 
to participate, respond and adapt.

WHĀNAU  As whānau we respect, support, 
foster and maintain relationships with each 
other, our environment, hāpu and iwi.

INDIVIDUALS/HOUSEHOLDS  
As individuals and households we 
connect with our friends and family, 
whānau, neighbours and communities.

WHĀNAU  
is a Māori term which can loosely be 
translated to mean extended family. 
In the strict sense, Māori use this term 
to define those related by whakapapa 
(genealogical ties). However, in today’s 
ever-changing world (te ao hurihuri), 
the term ‘whānau’ is often applied to 
other closely-connected groups of 
people, the members of which work 
for the collective benefit of the whole. 
This is an important nuance within the 
context of this plan, which recognises 
that in times of need it is our ability to 
work together for the greater good to 
withstand, bounce back from, or adapt 
to shocks and stresses. 

COMMUNITIES 
in the context of this plan, takes 
the broadest meaning. It includes 
groups of people living or working in 
the same geographic area, such as 
a neighbourhood or suburb, and a 
group of people who have common 
interests, attitudes, business or socio-
economic characteristics. In working 
with this plan, you are encouraged to 
think inclusively about the different 
communities you belong to and 
what contributions each can make to 
resilience.

ORGANISATIONS  
refers to all forms of organisation 
including Central Government, 
councils, iwi, businesses, schools, 
colleges and universities, charities and 
non-governmental bodies, churches 
and sports clubs. 

37

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesOUR PLAN

The rest of this document sets out our plan, the things we intend to do to continue 
building resilince across Greater Christchurch. The plan is structured as follows:

Our Guiding Principles 
Two guiding principles that cut across our goals. ‘Cross-cutting’ in nature, they 
are symbolically wrapped around the adjacent diagram reflecting that they should 
be implicit to a greater or lesser degree in each programme. The principles 
emerged from background work and dialogue with our Key Influencers. 

Fundamentally they reflect, firstly that Greater Christchurch needs to honour 
the bi-cultural governance arrangements agreed between Māori and European 
Settlers in the mid 1800s, and secondly, reflecting our experience since 2011, that 

Government at all levels need to work closer together.

The Guiding Principles are explored further on the following pages.

o ll a

Consistency a n d c

R
E
P
S
O
R
P

b o r a t ion across all tiers of g

CONNECT

o

v

e

r
n

6

7

3 

2 

8

11

10

1 

 9

5 

4 

m

e

n

t

I

P
A
R
T
C
P
A
T
E

I

A m

eaningful Treaty partne r s h i p   w it h N gāi Tahu

UNDERSTAND

Our Resilience Goals
We have set four goals – Connect, Participate, Prosper and 
Understand – to help us structure our activity towards 
extending the resilience of Greater Christchurch. Each is 
framed around building capacity in our people, places, 
organisations and systems so we have confidence to face 
our challenges. 

Our Resilience Programmes
Each goal contains a series of programmes which are the 
building blocks for improving our resilience. Collectively all 
11 programmes will strengthen our capacity to adapt and 
thrive in an uncertain future. The adjacent diagram illustrates 
this inter-connectivity highlighting that while programmes are 

assigned to a particular goal, they also contribute to, and align 
with other goals. This structure recognises the interconnected, 

complex nature of our challenges and encourages holistic, integrated 

and collaborative solutions.

Our Resilience Actions
Under each of the 11 programmes are action areas which outline what this plan 
proposes to do to tackle the challenges described at a programme level, and the 
outcomes we can expect. The action areas list out aligned projects or initiatives 
that have recently been delivered and confirmed projects. 

However, the bulk of activity is contained within the implementation plan that 
sits towards the end of this plan. It contains a further 50 or so actions that local 
groups, voluntary organisations, business and governmental organisations have 
identified and will be committing resources to. This part of the plan will continue 
to evolve year on year as new ideas emerge.

Building Resilience inGREATER CHRISTCHURCHA meaningful Treaty partnership with Ngāi Tahu

Consistency and collaboration across all tiers of government

CONNECT

PARTICIPATE

PROSPER

UNDERSTAND

We are prosperous  

by sustaining the vitality  

of the environment, 
fostering innovation  
and attracting people

6

Connect internationally

9

We understand risks  

to be better prepared for 

future challenges 

 

Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

We are connected 
communities living in 

adaptable places 

 

We are a community  
that participates in 
shaping our future 

 

1 

Connect people

A  Develop events and local 

information resources 
to help new residents 
build connections with 
people in their immediate 
communities. 

B  Develop, improve and  

sustain support programmes  
for vulnerable people as an 
enduring resilience-building 
activity.  

4 

Build participation and  
trust in decision-making

A  Experiment with alternative 
forms of public participation  
to promote awareness of 
issues and engage people in 
decision-making. 

B  Develop tools, mechanisms 
and processes that enable 
individuals to be more active 
participants in the success 
of Greater Christchurch.

 
 
 
 
Support community  
organisations and 
leaders

A  Provide support services 

that enable community 
groups and leaders to 
resolve administrative and 
regulatory processes. 
B  Facilitate networking 
between community 
organisations as a means 
to develop shared direction 
and more efficient use of 
resources. 

C  Strengthen funding 

arrangements to build 
confidence and stimulate 
investment in the 
community and voluntary 
sector.

 
 
 
Create adaptable places

2 

5 

A  Consolidate and enhance 
our network of strategic 
and local centres to provide 
accessible focal points for 
communities.

B  Promote transport 

alternatives in everyday life 
to reduce car dependency.

C  Collaborate with 

communities to create 
healthy, safe and welcoming 
facilities and places. 

3 

 
 
 
Improve the quality, 
choice and affordability 
of housing

A  Continue to support and 

develop initiatives to 
improve the quality of new 
and existing housing. 

B  Develop a consistent source 

of housing research to 
inform proactive planning 
for Greater Christchurch’s 
future housing needs.

A  Build strong national and 
international connections 
as foundations to attract 
people, develop markets and 
stimulate collaboration. 

B  Future proof our physical 

infrastructure to safeguard 
our economic performance 
and overseas trading 
connections. 

C  Invest in attracting and 
retaining workers from 
overseas to supplement 
our ageing workforce and 
stimulate new business ideas.  

7

Foster a culture of 
innovation

A  Support an environment 
that enables innovation 
and creativity as means to 
diversify our economy and 
add value to our production. 
B  Commissioning of research 
and regular reviews of global 
and technological trends to 
maintain awareness of fast 
moving change.

C  Support the emergence of 
the social enterprise sector 
as partners in driving change 
in our communities. 

8

Sustain the vitality of  
the natural environment 

A  Build capacity to source food 

from our local and urban 
environments to sustain our 
people and rediscover our 
relationships with nature. 

B  Develop projects and 
initiatives that support 
restoration of indigenous 
biodiversity across an 
ecological network.

A  Develop and agree objective 
risk evidence and definitions 
in a non-technical language 
as starting points to engage 
the community about risks 
they face.

B  Openly engage the 

community to explore risk 
scenarios as a foundation 
for dialogue about risk 
reduction.

10

 
 
Manage the risks we 
face

A  Develop a risk reduction 

framework to help us invest 
efficiently in interventions 
around our threats and 
hazards.

B  Review the role and use of 
insurance as a tool for risk 
transfer.

C  Support community 

preparedness in response to 
acceptance of risk.

11

 
 
 
Securing our future in 
the eastern parts of 
Christchurch

  During 2016/17, the newly 

formed Regenerate 
Christchurch will set out 
an initial list of priorities 
and projects which the 
Implementation Plan (at  
the back of this document) 
will pick up.

39

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesOUR GUIDING PRINCIPLES

A meaningful Treaty partnership with Ngāi Tahu

Why is this principle critical to resilience 
in Greater Christchurch?

The treaty is a partnership between Māori and the Crown, which 
requires the partners to act toward each other ‘reasonably and with 
the utmost good faith’. — 1991 Waitangi Tribunal (Ngāi Tahu Report)

This principle acknowledges the mana (influence, prestige, authority, control) 
of both Ngāi Tahu and the Crown whose respective leaders signed Te Tiriti 
o Waitangi (the Māori language text) in 1840. They agreed to live together,
the Crown taking responsibility for European settlers (kawanatanga), Ngāi
Tahu communities (hapū) retaining their own autonomy (tino rangatiratanga).
Incongruities across the two language versions of the Treaty gave rise to different
interpretations and led ultimately to the enunciation of a series of Treaty
Principles by the Waitangi Tribunal, Courts and Government in the last quarter of
the 20th Century.

The principles focus on the broad sentiments, intentions and goals of the Treaty, 
not its words. The treaty partnership was expressed within the Ngāi Tahu Deed 
of Settlement and subsequently the Ngāi Tahu Claims Settlement Act 1998 
formalising the relationship between the Crown and Ngāi Tahu as Treaty Partners. 
They include the principle of partnership and good faith which the Resilient 
Greater Christchurch Plan seeks to honour and give effect to.

What we will be doing?

Building on this, government agencies and councils will develop and enhance 
their existing relationships with local Papatipu Rūnanga. Through regular formal 
engagement between respective governors, annual programmes of action can be 
developed, prioritised and implemented in collaboration with Ngāi Tahu whānau 
and Papatipu Rūnanga. 

What resilience value will this principle contribute?

The resilience value is in building a more inclusive and genuinely bi-cultural set of 
governance arrangements. This will lead to more meaningful and collaborative 
decisions and resilience building activities for Greater Christchurch.

The expression of Treaty 
Partnerships took a significant step 
forward following the enactment 
of the Canterbury Earthquake 
Recovery Act 2011. Te Rūnanga 
o Ngāi Tahu was recognised as a
statutory partner alongside local
and central government agencies,
and invited to participate in all
decisions relating to the recovery
of Greater Christchurch governed
by the Act. Such recognition and
provision for Treaty partnership
was unprecedented and
has allowed each partner to
understand each other better and
make more meaningful decisions.
This has confirmed a strong
treaty partnership and examples
of meaningful collaboration have
resulted in positive outcomes for
the Crown, Ngāi Tahu and the
wider community.

Building Resilience inGREATER CHRISTCHURCHConsistency and collaboration across all tiers of government

Why is this principle critical to resilience 
in Greater Christchurch?

Government agencies, public organisations and iwi leaders at the local, regional 
and national level have a role to play in building and delivering a Resilient Greater 
Christchurch. They are interdependent and it is critical that there is consistency of 
understanding of the issues involved, as well as collaboration in policy formulation, 
investment and activity. 

What we will be doing?

Key pillars of consistency and collaboration are developing a common base of 
evidence and understanding, and the use of effective and positive relationships 
between agencies to find solutions that reflect specific local conditions. Beyond 
these, it is about taking opportunities to manage resources effectively, avoiding 
duplication and delivering in a cost-effective manner; making use of regulation as 
lightly, but as robustly as is needed to drive change or compliance; and most of all, 
furthering the health and prosperity of Greater Christchurch. 

What resilience value will this principle contribute?

Within the New Zealand context, Greater Christchurch has many lessons to share 
from its earthquake experiences and a unique perspective on resilience. Often, 
the most powerful policy directives are mandated at a Central Government level. 
For this reason it is important that the affected councils co-ordinate efforts to 
share knowledge and insights. Collaboration and consistency plays a critical role in 
advancing the long-term integrated planning and initiatives that will ensure we are 
better prepared for the future.

Alongside the Greater Christchurch 
Urban Development Strategy 
Partnership, the Canterbury Natural 
Hazard Risk Reduction Group is 
another example of collaboration. 
Formed in 2016, its role is to 
develop and implement a regional 
approach to managing natural 
hazard risk across the Canterbury 
region. The Group is a collaborative 
approach across all councils 
and Civil Defence Emergency 
Management. The Group reports 
into the governance structures 
for both the Canterbury Civil 
Defence Emergency Management 
Group Joint Committee and the 
Canterbury Mayoral Forum.

41

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesGoal 1
CONNECT

Aroha atu,  
aroha mai. 

Care and respect given away;  
Care and respect returned. 

 

WE ARE CONNECTED  

COMMUNITIES LIVING IN  

ADAPTABLE PLACES

Mā te tuakana te teina e tika ai;  
mā te teina te tuakana e tika ai.

Everyone has a role to play in  
achieving collective outcomes,  
each looking out for one another.

CONNECT

WE ARE CONNECTED COMMUNITIES  
LIVING IN ADAPTABLE PLACES 

Why this goal is important to resilience in Greater Christchurch

Connections between people and the places they live create a sense of 
community. They are also critical components of resilience. 

Greater Christchurch has strong communities but the earthquakes caused 
change. Some people were forced to move away from earthquake-damaged 
areas, and others used the repair of earthquake damaged homes as an 
opportunity to sell and relocate. There has also been a large inflow of migrants 
to take up work in Greater Christchurch to help rebuild the city. 

The change has disrupted many community connections, and in growth areas 
has created new communities where networks between people need to be 
created. Without focus on whānaungatanga, or community building, we fail to 
learn from our post-earthquake experience. It was the power of people, through 
manaakitanga, that enabled us to cope and recover. Knowing our neighbours, 
having recognisable and accessible local leaders, and having people to turn to are 
critical to the resilience of our communities. 

Kaitiakitanga emphasises that we must nurture the places we live in, as much 
as we nurture the relationships between people. Under this goal is the need to 
ensure our urban environments are inclusive and adaptable. 

The availability of safe, communal places and spaces where people can meet 
is at the heart of a community and of tūrangawaewae. These places are a 
place to create memories, foster connections with people and generate a 
sense of belonging. More widely, the ability of our neighbourhoods to satisfy 
our needs is at the heart of resilience. Within parts of Greater Christchurch, 
local communities lack convenient access to local facilities, including sources of 
nutritious food, while in others people do not feel safe in their neighbourhoods. 

Affordable, quality housing is also at the heart of community needs. One of 
the most chronic stresses present across Greater Christchurch is the lack of 
affordable and quality housing. Average incomes fall short of what households 
can afford to pay for housing, whilst the quality of rental housing can affect 
people’s health. Taking positive steps to improve the quality of our housing stock 
and to encourage the development of the types and sizes of homes we need is a 
positive investment in a resilient future.

In addressing the two guiding principles, the key is for government agencies and 
councils to facilitate grassroots relationships and networks. These will become 
a more enduring way to help support people and reduce levels of dependency 
on public services. To build effective relationships with Ngāi Tahu, there needs to 
be wider acknowledgement of the enduring ancestral and cultural ties of Māori 
people that underpin their connectedness to places, and the social structures of 
whānau, hapu and iwi that offer lessons for wider community resilience.

WHĀNAUNGATANGA  
Respecting, fostering and maintaining 
relationships with each other.

 

MANAAKITANGA 
The expression of reciprocity, 
hospitality and care for each other. 

KAITIAKITANGA 
Working strategically to protect the 
environment for the use, enjoyment 
and prosperity of present and future 
generations.

TŪRANGAWAEWAE 
A place to stand, a right to speak, 
an obligation to contribute to wider 
community wellbeing.

 

Under this goal,  
three programmes of action  
are focused on how we will: 

1    CONNECT PEOPLE 

2   CREATE ADAPTABLE PLACES

3     IMPROVE THE QUALITY AND 

CHOICE OF HOUSING

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

45

CONNECT

CONNECT PEOPLE

Our experience following the 
earthquakes underlines that people 
and whānau are the building blocks 
of resilient communities. Across 
our communities as a whole, people 
worked together to help each other, 
but it was notable that those with 
strong neighbourhood connections 
sprang into action faster. Building 
connections and relationships 
between members of the community 
is an important investment for the 
future at a local level. 

Since the earthquakes, there has 
been widespread movement of 
people – some through displacement 
resulting from earthquake impacts, 
others as new arrivals taking part in 

1

Resilience Value
Strong communities are able to 
respond to change more rapidly and 
recover from unforeseen events. 
People who connect with each other 
are able to access support, resources 
and be part of informal support 
networks. This reduces dependency 
on public services. It will empower 
people to help themselves and others 
in times of crisis. Connectedness will 
better support individuals that may 
endure feelings of helplessness  
with consequential implications for  
mental health.

rebuild work. This has brought new 
people into many of our communities 
and resulted in rapid establishment 
of new suburban housing. Helping 
these people to integrate into existing 
communities, and nurturing the 
establishment of local networks in 
new communities, is a critical way  
we can support them and help  
build resilience.

Vulnerable people are present 
in all our communities. While 
neighbourhood connections can help 
support these people in response to 
sudden events and to prevent social 
isolation, it is the everyday stresses 
endured by these people that needs 
more careful attention.

Challenge/Opportunity 
(see pages 32–34)

Level of Resilience Building 
(see page 37)

Actors and  
Networks

Related 
Programmes

Government agencies 
Voluntary groups
Community organisations

2

5

Links with actions/programmes of other 100RC network cities

BERKELEY

SAN FRANCISCO

People and whānau are the building blocks of resilient communities and there 
are a number of ways to build and strengthen ties across groups. Greater 
Christchurch is eager to learn more about community building and preparedness 
initiatives from the Bay Area such as San Francisco’s Digital Platform – SF72, and 
Berkeley’s neighbour-to-neighbour connections programme

ACTION 1A 

ACTION 1B 

Develop, improve and  
sustain support programmes  
for vulnerable people as an 
enduring resilience-building activity. 

What will we be doing? In the aftermath 
of the Canterbury Earthquake Sequence, 
government agencies, including the 
district health board, collaborated 
on the Community in Mind Strategy. 
This has stimulated community led-
activity, innovative services and greater 
collaboration. Government agencies, 
community organisations and councils 
will seek funding to sustain and maintain 
these activities and services, with the 
aim of securing an enduring and evolving 
form of resilience-building for vulnerable 
people. 

What outcomes do we expect to see? 
Vulnerable people are well-supported 
and participate in the community, which 
helps to decrease feelings of isolation and 
loneliness. All organisations are aware of 
vulnerable people in our communities. 
Mental health support initiatives provide 
support at a local level.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  The All Right? Campaign
•  Community in Mind Strategy

Initial committed projects identified in 
the Implementation Plan 

Psychosocial Initiatives Review  
LEAD: Canterbury District Health Board 
Committed (within 2 years)

(NB. The implementation plan  
contains other proposed projects and  
ideas to be developed)

Develop events and local 
information resources to help  
new residents build connections 
with people in their immediate 
communities. 

What will we be doing? We will continue 
to create sources of local information and 
provide community activities to help new 
residents integrate into communities. 
This may include welcome packs and 
social media resources and, in newly-built 
communities, events that help to establish 
community networks. At a city, town or 
suburban level, cultural events and other 
activities aimed at particular communities 
of interest will be supported as ways 
of helping to assimilate people and to 
celebrate our diversity. 

As well as connecting people, these 
activities and resources can raise 
awareness of sources of social support, 
employment, travel choice options, 
emergency procedures and local 
networks that can help individuals, 
communities and whānau build their own 
resilience. 

What outcomes do we expect to 
see? Increased levels of community 
engagement and participation in all 
activities across Greater Christchurch 
with improved levels of empowerment 
and self-help. Supportive and welcoming 
neighbourhoods where diverse people 
know each other.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Selwyn Newcomers and Migrants 

Strategy

•  Meet Your Street
•  Christchurch Migrants Centre, providing 
free advice to new migrants on services 
and community groups 

•  International cultural festivals including 

the Lantern Festival and Diwali

 

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

47

CONNECT

CREATE ADAPTABLE PLACES

2

Outside our own homes, the quality 
of the natural environment, buildings 
and the network of streets and spaces, 
defines the way we go about our daily 
lives. The convenience and safety of 
transport routes and travel modes 
determine our choice of travel. The 
ambience and functionality of a space 
encourages us to spend time there, in 
turn shaping our lifestyle choices and 
social engagement and ultimately our 
physical and mental wellbeing. In this 
respect, equity is important. Only by 
enabling people of different physical 
abilities, cultural beliefs or with other 
specific needs to access and share 
their local environment will our  
places and spaces become inclusive.  

The growth and development of 
Greater Christchurch has created a 
pattern of commercial centres with 
roles and functions that are sometimes 
poorly defined, often to the detriment 
of their quality as places to spend time. 
Furthermore, our road-based transport 
network has become a dominant 
feature of the urban environment. 

In looking to the future, strategic 
investment (commercial, public and 
transport) is now being channelled 
into 14 Key Activity Centres and a 
network of smaller suburban centres 
across Greater Christchurch. The key 
challenge is to mould the primary 
commercial functions of each centre 
into hubs of wider activity that draw 
in public, cultural and community 
services as well as being well-placed 
to accommodate different types of 
housing. More integrated local centres 
can reduce our need to travel. For 
everyday journeys – to work, to schools, 
to the shops – we need to encourage 
walking and cycling for short trips as 
part of a wider strategy to improve 
community health. For other journeys, 
alternatives to the private car need to 
be made more convenient if we are 
to avoid returning to pre-earthquake 
levels of congestion which will threaten 
the lifelines of our economy and the 
quality of our environment.

In making places more resilient, 
people must be a part of any process 
of change. Where local views are not 

taken into account, people can become 
resistant to change and protective of 
their local public environments. This 
reaction can create bureaucratic drag, 
even on simple projects. The reverse 
is also true. Communities can be 
frustrated with the lack of ability to 
change things in their local environment 
because of rules, processes or other 
barriers – even when they have funding 
or know-how to deliver the work.

Resilience Value
Making the most of our places and 
spaces – including our urban centres, 
public buildings and reserves – will 
create inclusive, robust and safe places 
for people. Encouraging more intensive 
forms of housing around areas where 
social and community infrastructure 
is generally more concentrated, such 
as urban centres, will maximise use 
of infrastructure and public places. 
Integrated and inclusive urban planning 
can help improve community wellbeing 
by ensuring good connections between 
homes, workplaces, facilities and social 
and cultural activities. 

Challenge/Opportunity 
(see pages 32–34)

Level of Resilience Building 
(see page 37)

Actors and  
Networks

Related 
Programmes

Government agencies 
Councils
Business community
Regeneration agencies 
Ngāi Tahu
Community organisations, 
communities and users

1

3

5

7

Links with actions/programmes of other 100RC network cities

NORFOLK

Norfolk has also recognised this as a key strategy and in undertaking a range of 
initiatives to build neighbourhood level capacity to drive economic development 
and implement place-based revitalisation efforts. The strategy has strong parallels 
with Greater Christchurch’s programme to create adaptable places that improve 
the quality, accessibility and amenity of neighbourhoods, enabling opportunities 
for collaboration and information sharing.

ACTION 2A 

ACTION 2B 

ACTION 2C 

Consolidate and enhance our 
network of strategic and local 
centres to provide accessible 
focal points for communities. 

What will we be doing? Led by 
local councils, we will develop plans, 
encourage investment and deliver 
projects to make our centres become 
places that people enjoy spending 
time in, and from which they can 
satisfy multiple needs in a single 
convenient trip by foot, bicycle, 
bus and, as needed, using private 
cars. Around centres, opportunities 
will be explored to develop high-
quality medium density housing 
developments.

What outcomes do we expect to 
see? Our centres prosper, containing 
a broader mix of uses including social 
venues, business hubs, different 
forms of housing, making efficient 
use of space (e.g. parking/servicing), 
and maximising the capacity of 
infrastructure networks.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Central Christchurch Recovery Plan
•  Suburban Centre Masterplans – 

Christchurch City Council 

•  Rangiora and Kaiapoi Town Centre 

Plans – Waimakariri District 

•  Lincoln and Rolleston Town Centre 

Plans – Selwyn District 

•  Kaiapoi Library
•  Te Hāpua – Halswell Community 

Centre 

Promote transport alternatives 
in everyday life to reduce car 
dependency. 

Collaborate with communities 
to create healthy, safe and 
welcoming facilities and places. 

What will we be doing? Led by local 
councils, we will strategically look at 
opportunities to extend our public 
transport network and improve the 
quality and perceptions of services. 
At a neighbourhood level we will look 
for opportunities to make walking and 
cycling the obvious choice for very 
short trips with a focus on making safe 
and convenient linkages using tools 
including Universal Design, Crime 
Prevention through Environmental 
Design (CPTED) and Health Impact 
Assessment. 

What outcomes do we expect 
to see? Everyone in Greater 
Christchurch has access to a variety of 
travel options. There will be increased 
levels of public transport patronage 
with more local trips made on foot or 
by bicycle contributing to healthier 
lifestyles. The potential of local rail 
transport is explored.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Christchurch Cycleways Network
•  Central Christchurch Bus Exchange

What will we be doing? We are 
investing in post-earthquake facility 
rebuild projects that are creating new 
public environments where the input 
of communities and users are critical 
to their future success. Alongside 
these are funding streams focused on 
supporting delivery of community-
led initiatives. A natural extension of 
this will be consideration of different 
models of ownership, including 
social enterprise. The physical assets 
of public facilities and reserves 
could be put into trusts or leased 
to a community organisation which 
can make its own decisions about 
fundraising and spending, and can 
harness the energy of local volunteers. 

What outcomes do we expect to 
see? Spaces and facilities that are 
well-utilised for social gatherings 
and other activities, with a reduction 
in crime, vandalism and nuisance. 
Facilities run with community level 
support. Design of community 
facilities and spaces that have 
been informed and shaped by the 
community.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Life in Vacant Spaces, Gap Filler and 
Greening the Rubble are successful 
Christchurch-based community 
driven initiatives that creatively 
define space and place
•  Transition Programme 
•  Aranui Community Centre artwork –  

funding and delivery support for 
public art

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

49

CONNECT

IMPROVE THE QUALITY, CHOICE  
AND AFFORDABILITY OF HOUSING

Our homes are the most important 
places in the lives of our families. 
The quality of our living environment 
influences our wellbeing and the costs 
to maintain our standard of living. The 
choice of housing available, along with 
how much we earn, can restrict where 
we live. 

The underlying quality of the existing 
housing stock in Greater Christchurch 
(and wider New Zealand) is poor, 
reflecting the age of the majority of 
properties. Limited insulation, lack 
of efficient heating, ventilation and 
security, combined with poor build 
quality, are common characteristics. 
Poor quality homes are most common 
in the rental and social housing 

sectors where occupants are paying 
disproportionate running costs and 
can face consequent health problems. 

As Greater Christchurch’s population 
continues to grow it is imperative 
that people have access to a greater 
diversity of housing types and 
tenures at prices that they can afford. 
There is a mismatch between the 
supply and demand of particular 
types of housing, and supply is being 
driven from an investment-based 
perspective. Experience in parts of 
Europe has recognised that housing 
is an important resource where 
public policy can play a role to guide 
development and management.

 

3

Resilience Value
Better quality housing means a safer 
and healthier community. A safer 
and healthier community is better 
able to participate and respond to 
shocks. Planning our communities 
and neighbourhoods to accommodate 
diversity, including income, age 
and ethnicity, will minimise social 
displacement and disruption 
while building social cohesion and 
tūrangawaewae.

Challenge/Opportunity 
(see pages 32–34)

Level of Resilience Building 
(see page 37)

Actors and  
Networks

Related 
Programmes

Government agencies 
Ngāi Tahu
Councils
Housing providers
Development industry

1

9

11

Links with actions/programmes of other 100RC network cities

SAN FRANCISCO

Households in Greater Christchurch felt the acute shock of lost housing supply 
following the earthquakes, and continues to experience the stress of disparity 
between incomes and housing costs. As we look to improve overall housing 
affordability, we are eager to learn from cities like San Francisco which are  
exploring a range of initiatives such as: inclusionary building requirements, 
affordable housing bonuses and reviving public housing areas to create thriving 
mixed-income communities.

ACTION 3A 

ACTION 3B 

Continue to support and develop 
initiatives to improve the quality 
of new and existing housing. 

What will we be doing? We will develop 
detailed projects that help people to 
design better-quality forms of housing, 
using new construction techniques and 
modern resource-efficient materials, 
as well as working with government to 
incentivise retrofitting existing housing. 
Major programmes are also underway 
which will see substantial improvement 
and reconfiguration of social housing. 

What outcomes do we expect to 
see? Improving standards of rental 
properties, fewer housing-related 
healthcare admissions, arresting the 
decline in levels of home ownership.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Build Back Smarter
•  Housing Exemplar Projects

Develop a consistent source 
of housing research to inform 
proactive planning for Greater 
Christchurch’s future housing needs. 

What will we be doing? In 2013, 
Government agencies and councils  
(working together under the Urban 
Development Strategy Partnership) 
commissioned a Greater Christchurch 
Housing Market Assessment that quantified 
trends and pressures on the housing market 
at the time, which drove policy changes. 
The focus will be on regularly updating of 
this type of information and, in response 
to trends, developing Greater Christchurch 
housing market policy interventions. 
Wider research and activity may include 
experimentation with different housing 
concepts including co-housing, co-living and 
the use of community-centred architecture. 

What outcomes do we expect to see? 
Improved match of supply and demand in 
housing types, delivered with particular 
emphasis on affordable housing products 
for those on and below median incomes. 
Ahead of that, building more informed 
awareness of local housing market 
information and issues, including informed 
debate over particular interventions.

Successful current examples of activities 
include: 
•  2013 Greater Christchurch Housing 

Market Assessment

•  Christchurch City Council Housing Policy 
•  Christchurch Housing Accord 

Initial committed projects identified in 
the Implementation Plan 

Consistent Housing Monitoring  
LEAD: Urban Development Strategy 
Partnership 
Committed (within 1 year)

(NB. The implementation plan contains  
other proposed projects and ideas to be 
developed)

 

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

51

CONNECT

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1   Selwyn Gets Ready 

The Selwyn Gets Ready website is a tool used to create stronger, safer and 
more connected communities in Selwyn. Households enter their contact details 
and any special needs, resources and skills they have which could be helpful to 
their community in an emergency situation. Communities can use the website 
to organise local activities within their neighbourhood and share information 
that affects their safety and wellbeing. The Selwyn District Council Emergency 
Management team also uses the website to send important safety messages 
to individual households, streets, townships or the whole district about topics 
including severe weather, warnings of uncontrolled fires, boil water notices or 
local police messages.

1   Meet Your Street/Summer in Selwyn 

Meet Your Street and Summer in Selwyn also provide opportunities for people 
to meet their neighbours over coffee and games in local parks. Meet Your Street 
launched in 2015 in response to the Selwyn District’s rapid population growth, at 
4.5 per cent per year. Hosted by the Selwyn Youth Council and Selwyn District 
Council, Meet Your Street visited 40 different Selwyn streets and provided a fun, 
informal event with free coffee, tea and juice, to encourage residents to get to 
know their neighbours, feel welcome and connected. Summer in Selwyn offers 
free community events such as concerts and picnics in reserves across Selwyn.

1   Brave – A Daisy Poetry Promenade 

This project involved the production of a promenade arts performance in 
East Christchurch where the audience moved between six different spaces 
and experienced art forms such as poetry, DJ’s music, Pasifika dance, singing, 
rapping, photography and videography. The Brave team built on strong 
relationships with artists in the community to create this celebration of Samoan 
heritage, identity and talent and in doing so fostered belonging, connection 
and pride in cultural identity. This initiative has been supported by the LinC 
(Leadership in Communities) project in 2015/16.

1   ACTIS

The Aranui Community Trust Incorporated Society (ACTIS) takes a joined-up 
approach to support community-based recovery plans. ACTIS is locally and 
community driven and allows the community to assess its own needs, identify 
solutions to these needs and work towards implementation. ACTIS connects 
members of the community with social services including Housing New Zealand, 
community lawyers, New Zealand Police and budgeting and debt advice. ACTIS 
also runs events such as walking groups and sport events, and provides a public 
space in Aranui for drop-in sessions to assist members of the community.

 

 

 

1   Healthy Christchurch

Healthy Christchurch is led by the Canterbury District Health Board and is a 
multi-agency partnership based on the World Health Organization Healthy Cities 
model. Healthy Christchurch ensures all sectors and groups are acknowledged 
for their role in creating health-promoting environments in which we live, 
work, learn and play. Health services are one of the components of a health-
promoting community; but the recreation, employment, youth, environmental 
enhancement, transport, and housing sectors are just as important to ensuring 
people are able to lead flourishing lives. Healthy Christchurch aims to:
•   forge a common vision for a healthy city
•   foster healthy relationships between diverse agencies and sectors, from 

‘grassroots’ groups to government agencies

•   enable flexible, collaborative and prompt responses to emergent health issues
•   ensure all policy incorporates a health perspective.

2   Christchurch City Council  

Transitional Programme

What do you do when a central city has more vacant space than buildings? In 
Christchurch, the result has been both community- and Council-led initiatives 
to reimagine those spaces. Community groups such as Life in Vacant Spaces 
Trust, Gap Filler and Greening the Rubble work on projects to fill the spaces and 
engage with the community; the Council has created grant funding programmes 
and funded initiatives to improve public amenity. All are aimed at creating spaces 
which engage, delight and surprise residents and visitors.

The programme provides 
opportunities to test new ideas, 
explore new concepts and look at 
ways to bring people back to the city. 
As well as transforming under-utilised 
spaces, it provides opportunities for 
residents to be directly involved in the 
recovery of their city and showcase 
their creativity both nationally and 
internationally.

Now, as a more holistic approach to 
regeneration emerges, we all have a 
role to play in creating adaptable and 
resilient space – even if some of those 
are temporary.

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

53

CONNECT

2   You Me We Us Kaiapoi

You Me We Us is an exciting, grassroots community development initiative that 
gives the people of Kaiapoi, Kairaki and Pines Beach the opportunity to make 
great things happen in their communities. Together, they encourage and allow 
the community to identify priorities and work collectively and co-operatively to 
deliver outcomes. 

This approach enhances the wellbeing of the community where there is 
increased participation in volunteer work and more people involved in events 
and projects, creating a strong, vibrant neighbourhood and community. You Me 
We Us has developed strong relationships with local schools, community groups, 
local businesses and organisations which results in increased support and 
involvement from the whole community. 

The initiative was established in September 2013 and to date, You Me We 
Us has held or supported a large number of successful projects and events 
including: Kaiapoi River clean-ups, ‘Pop up’ cinema events, spy training events for 
children, Adopt a Planter, Welcome Bags, Under 7s-Over-70s artwork afternoon, 
community pathway and giant Os & Xs board project, Kaiapoi Invisible Choir, 
Gardening through Schools, Food Forest Planting, and the Kaiapoi Night Market. 

You Me We Us is an initiative that supports and encourages the community 
to shape and lead its own recovery, welcome new residents, and connect as a 
community.

2   Christchurch Central Recovery Plan 

The earthquake on 22 February 2011 resulted in the loss of 70 per cent of the 
buildings in Christchurch Central’s core, causing large-scale displacement of 
commercial and public sector activity. Widespread demolition offered a unique 

 

 

 

 

 

 

opportunity to remodel the heart of a city. The Christchurch 
Central Recovery Plan was published in 2012, drawing on more than 
100,000 contributions from the community captured in the ‘Share 
an Idea’ engagement process. Component parts of the Recovery 
Plan are now being delivered through a mix of public and private 
sector investment, with early recovery focused on large-scale public 
projects as a means to catalyse private investment. With people 
now returning to the city centre, the stages ahead will be about 
working with communities to identify and deliver regeneration 
opportunities that create the green, vibrant and liveable city that 
the Recovery Plan envisioned.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2   Nga Whāriki Manaaki –  

Woven Mats of Welcome 

Ngā Whāriki Manaaki is a series of 13 public realm works of art that feature an 
arrangement of natural stone pavers of varying shades and colours positioned 
along the Ōtākaro/Avon River promenade. In sequence, they reference the Māori 
process of welcome (pōwhiri) and are intended as an expression of goodwill and 
hospitality for all visitors to the city of Christchurch.

2   Urban Cycleway Projects 

Ongoing cycleway improvements in Greater Christchurch provide enhanced 
safety and improve transport choice for residents. 

The Waimakariri Urban Cycleways Project provides connections for residents 
to schools, workplaces, retail and health centres in Rangiora, linking Woodend 
to Rangiora and providing a connection from Rangiora to Kaiapoi and beyond to 
Christchurch City.

Selwyn District’s new nine kilometre off-road path for pedestrians and cyclists 
has provided an important link between Rolleston and Lincoln and is an 
important addition to the strategic cycling network which links the fast-growing 
townships in Eastern Selwyn and connects to Christchurch City. 

Christchurch City has also made a strong commitment to generating a 
significant modal shift to cycling through its Major Cycleway programme. This 
programme is planned to provide an extensive and connected cycleway network 
comprising 13 Major Cycle Routes to provide safe and direct links between the 
Central City and suburbs, education facilities, business and shopping zones as 
well as popular recreation areas. The Christchurch City Council will deliver $65 
million of its $156 million Major Cycle Routes network over the next three years, 
with a local investment of $23.5 million.

3   Build Back Smarter 

Build Back Smarter is a free service providing homeowners with face-to-face, no 
obligation, expert advice on making homes warmer, drier, healthier and cheaper 
to run. The Build Back Smarter service is available to all homes in Christchurch 
and neighbouring parts of Selwyn and Waimakariri districts. In 2015:
•   1400 homes received a Build Back Smarter assessment
•   82% of customers believe their home will be healthier and more efficient by 

following the advice provided 

•  84% of customers were satisfied or very satisfied with the service received
•   53% have already made changes to their homes
•   Over 2000 people visited each home on show through the Exemplar  

Homes Tour.

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

55

Goal 2
PARTICIPATE

Ko te kai a te Rangatira,  

he kōrero. 

Conversation is the food of chiefs. 

 

WE ARE A COMMUNITY 

THAT PARTICIPATES 

IN SHAPING OUR FUTURE

Ehara taku toa I te toa takitahu,  

engari he toa takitini.

Our strength and success comes from  

being together, not acting alone.

PARTICIPATE

WE ARE A COMMUNITY  
THAT PARTICIPATES IN SHAPING 
THE FUTURE 

Why this goal is important to resilience in Greater Christchurch

A community where people contribute ideas and participate in decision-
making is one that cares about its future. 

In the aftermath of the Canterbury earthquakes local councils, government 
agencies and community organisations were placed in an overwhelming situation 
that in some instances exceeded their capacity. In response, the Canterbury 
Earthquake Recovery Authority (CERA), was established by Central Government 
and was given resources and powers to drive the response and recovery phases. 
At a grassroots level, local communities, energised by the contributions they had 
made in the immediate aftermath of the disaster, felt empowered to express 
clear views about how their communities could be built back better. During 2011 
and 2012, this community energy was harnessed by councils and government 
agencies to help shape plans for recovery, notably the Christchurch Central 
Recovery Plan.

However as time has passed, different opinions have emerged about leadership 
and the ability to contribute. For communities in Selwyn and Waimakariri, 
sudden rapid growth and recovery has required careful planning and investment 
which will, in time, improve the overall viability of these communities. For 
Ngāi Tahu, the earthquake recovery process has been a watershed period in 
establishing a stronger expression of rangatiratanga. Through legislation and 
positive influence, Papatipu Rūnanga have been empowered to inform, shape 
and embed cultural values, narratives and aspirations into the civic and private 
developments. Within Christchurch City, where the damage was most extensive, 
slow progress on major projects, wrangling over insurance and the draining 
experience of living in a damaged city have taken their toll. This is particularly 
true in the eastern suburbs. Community leaders have become exhausted while 
trust in governance has been eroded by decisions made using legislative powers, 
often behind closed doors. 

This programme of action responds to the positive and negative experiences 
by looking to reinvigorate community whanaungatanga, particularly in the 
way that leaders, councils and government agencies engage communities and 
devolve responsibility, built on trust, to the community level. 

In addressing the two guiding principles, government agencies and councils 
will work in a joined-up way to develop opportunities to actively engage and 
empower communities to drive change. This means supporting and building trust 
in the true spirit of civic partnership. Furthering effective relationships with Ngāi 
Tahu will build on the positive momentum that has emerged from earthquake 
recovery governance arrangements by co-creating structures, agendas and 
action that resolves outstanding grievances, but more positively helps forge 
shared direction for the future.

RANGATIRATANGA 
Leadership through collaboration, 
maintaining a high degree of personal 
integrity and ethical behaviour in all 
actions and decisions.

WHANAUNGATANGA  
Respecting, fostering and maintaining 
relationships with each other.

 

Under this goal,  
two programmes of action  
are focused on how we will: 

4    BUILD PARTICIPATION AND 
TRUST IN DECISION-MAKING 

5    SUPPORT THE COMMUNITY 
SECTOR AND COMMUNITY 
LEADERS

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

59

PARTICIPATE

BUILD PARTICIPATION AND  
TRUST IN DECISION-MAKING

People gain satisfaction from taking 
part in even small activities that give 
a sense of purpose and achievement. 
Lack of opportunities for participation 
can lead to a sense of powerlessness 
which compounds psychological 
stress and increases apathy with 
governance structures. Across 
Greater Christchurch, the community 
has become increasingly frustrated 
about the uncertainty of governance 
arrangements for long-term recovery 
and resilience, particularly in 
Christchurch City. The role of central 
government, both immediately post-
disaster and through the recovery, has 
been a key issue along with concerns 
about turnover in leadership positions 
due to burn-out. Given the point in 
recovery that Greater Christchurch 
is approaching, such frustrations and 
concerns around trust, empowerment, 

transparency, participation and 
governance must be addressed.

The challenge is to build a more 
trusting relationship between 
communities and decision-makers in 
Greater Christchurch. Central to this is 
changing the way in which governance 
engages with people, as all too often 
their processes rely on rigid and 
formulaic methods that are set up 
to be adversarial. These processes 
make engagement difficult, and are 
often protracted, meaning that people 
struggle to keep up with what is  
being decided. 

Transparent and participatory 
governance empowers the community 
to collaborate on plans and initiatives 
in areas which affect their interests.

4

Resilience Value
Personal involvement, engagement 
and activism aid the recovery of 
individuals, especially following 
a sudden event. This enhances 
wellbeing and a sense of belonging 
for those in supporting roles and 
those being supported. Long-term, 
the collective participation of 
individuals builds a sense of place in 
a community and collective effort to 
get things done. It is important that 
the necessary tools and resources 
are available for citizens to feel 
empowered and effect change.

Challenge/Opportunity 
(see pages 32–34)

Level of Resilience Building 
(see page 37)

Actors and  
Networks

Government agencies 
Councils
Ngāi Tahu 
Community groups
Business community 
Individuals

Related 
Programmes

1

5

10

2

9

11

Links with actions/programmes of other 100RC network cities

BYBLOS

SEMARANG

 
Transparent, participatory and informed governance, empowers the community 
and leads to better decision-making. Semarang has recognised this though their 
action to increase the role of participatory community monitoring and information 
co-ordination. Byblos aims to improve relationships with communities and citizens 
to build an actively engaged and empowered community. Greater Christchurch is 
willing to reach out to these network cities to learn and understand techniques 
that successfully build participation and trust in decision-making.

ACTION 4A 

ACTION 4B 

Experiment with alternative 
forms of public participation  
to promote awareness of  
issues and engage people in 
decision-making. 

What will we be doing? Councils 
and government agencies will 
seek alternative forms of public 
engagement and experiment 
with them to improve the quality 
of communication. To develop 
projects, policies or initiatives we 
will explore ways to involve people 
at the earliest stages so that more 
inclusive and effective outcomes can 
be achieved. Councils will look at how 
Community Boards, advisory groups 
and working parties involve members 
of the community across Greater 
Christchurch and share best practice. 

What outcomes do we expect to 
see? People are more informed 
about the issues that community 
leaders have to make decisions on and 
there is greater engagement of the 
‘silent majority’ on important issues, 
improving levels of confidence in 
decision-making. There is increased 
voting participation in local elections.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Eastern Vision/Evo::Space
•  Let’s Plan – Waimakariri Red Zone 

engagement process

 

Develop tools, mechanisms 
and processes that enable 
individuals to be more active 
participants in the success of 
Greater Christchurch.

What will we be doing? Councils and 
government agencies will develop, 
trial and roll out initiatives to enable 
people to take ownership and/
or leadership of issues that drive 
change. Areas under consideration 
include wider publication of regular 
Open Source data that could be 
developed for commercial or social 
enterprise purposes and alternative, 
inclusive plan-making processes. We 
will explore opportunities emerging 
through wider use of mobile 
technology. 

What outcomes do we expect to 
see? More active participation and 
engagement in problem identification 
and solving stages of public service 
project development.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Snap Send Solve
•  Little River Community Plan –  

a community-initiated plan 
supported by Council staff and 
resources which is as much about 
local action as it is about longer-
term infrastructure investment

 

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

61

PARTICIPATE

SUPPORT COMMUNITY  
ORGANISATIONS AND LEADERS

5

A study of community-based 
support during and following the 
earthquakes found it enhanced the 
wellbeing and sense of belonging 
of both those in the supporting role 
and those being supported. The act 
of contributing is crucial in adapting 
during and after disasters and in 
building resilience to adverse events. 
However, this phenomenon is not 
entirely self-sustaining. The support 
of external organisations, such as 
central government and councils, is 
essential to the ongoing success and 
sustainability of such community 
initiatives. 

At a grassroots level, the key for 
external organisations is to limit the 
amount of precious volunteer-time 
tied up in complex bureaucracy, delays 
because of legal technicalities, or 

hold-ups to the action because the 
right equipment cannot be provided at 
the right time. These types of barriers 
can be highly demotivating for people 
who are the driving force for making 
things happen. Similarly, community 
leaders who bring energy to drive 
local action can become overwhelmed 
and are vulnerable to fatigue by being 
overlooked and taken for granted. 

At the community, voluntary and not-
for-profit level, organisations rely on 
funding arrangements and contracts 
with government agencies, councils 
or other service providers. As a result 
business models and project plans can 
be very short-term in nature, while the 
scale of activity can be unavoidably 
limited. Creating a more stable 
platform of funding and support 
for our community organisations 

and voluntary sector means they 
can continue to deliver existing 
programmes and invest in bigger 
projects with more confidence.

Resilience Value
With strong grassroots connections, 
community organisations can be 
leaders and natural partners with 
government agencies and councils in 
driving social, environmental, cultural 
and economic wellbeing. Whether 
as part of everyday support systems, 
or in times of crisis, community 
and voluntary organisations are 
a vital source of support, energy 
and knowledge. Supporting these 
community organisations as partners 
in maintaining the wellbeing of our 
communities is an investment in our 
future resilience.

Challenge/Opportunity 
(see pages 32–34)

Level of Resilience Building 
(see page 37)

Actors and  
Networks

Government agencies 
Councils
Ngāi Tahu 
Community groups
Private sector (philanthropic) 
Individuals

Related 
Programmes

1

4

9

2

8

11

Links with actions/programmes of other 100RC network cities

MELBOURNE

There are dozens of local groups and individuals demonstrating leadership in 
making communities stronger and more effective at building resilience. Melbourne 
is developing a single resource for understanding, promoting and sharing the 
efforts that are occurring across the city. Greater Christchurch is eager to work 
closely with the Resilient Melbourne Delivery Office to understand leading 
practices and lessons learnt to support our local community organisations and 
leaders.

ACTION 5A 

ACTION 5B 

ACTION 5C 

Provide support services that 
enable community groups and 
leaders to resolve administrative 
and regulatory processes. 

What will we be doing? Together 
we will design and develop support 
frameworks that simplify bureaucratic 
processes, provide appropriate 
technical expertise and otherwise 
enable community groups to 
focus on the delivery of outcomes. 
Support arrangements and training 
programmes that build the capability 
of community leaders will also  
be reviewed.

What outcomes do we expect to 
see? The community sector reduces 
expenditure of effort on processes. 
Groups are able to access readily 
identifiable sources of support to  
build more confident and skilled 
community leaders.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Lyttelton Time Bank
•  Life in Vacant Spaces Trust 
•  Student Volunteer Army

Initial committed projects identified 
in the Implementation Plan 

Place Based Planning Framework 
LEAD: Christchurch City Council 
In Progress (within 1 year)

(NB. The implementation plan  
contains other proposed projects  
and ideas to be developed)

Facilitate networking between 
community organisations as 
a means to develop shared 
direction and more efficient use 
of resources. 

Strengthen funding 
arrangements to build 
confidence and stimulate 
investment in the community 
and voluntary sector.

What will we be doing? We will 
develop and maintain open databases 
of community organisations, 
encourage networking and host 
forums around complex or strategic 
issues. We will also encourage cross-
sector collaboration to develop 
integrated solutions to community 
issues and better sharing of resources.

What outcomes do we expect to 
see? Stronger community voices able 
to articulate wider perspectives on 
particular issues with more effective 
resource sharing, joint commissioning 
of projects and leveraging of private 
sector funding to reduce dependency 
on public services.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Christchurch Housing Forum –  
an open forum involving council, 
community and voluntary sector 
interests concerned with housing 
related issues

•  Ministry of Awesome – ‘Canterbury 

Innovation Ecosystem Map’

Initial committed projects identified 
in the Implementation Plan 

Community Group/ 
Resource Mapping  
LEAD: Urban Development  
Strategy Partners 
In Progress (1-2 years)

(NB. The implementation plan  
contains other proposed projects and ideas 
to be developed)

What will we be doing? Councils, 
government agencies and community 
organisations will develop and 
enhance funding arrangements by 
establishing new models of funding 
agreements, longer-term service 
contracts and funding roundtables. 
These approaches will have 
collaboration and cooperation at their 
core, looking at ways to grow the 
community and voluntary sector and, 
as opportunities arise, support the 
establishment of social enterprises. 

What outcomes do we expect to 
see? Closer partnering arrangements 
between government agencies, 
councils and the community and 
voluntary sector. Longer-term 
investment in staff, assets and 
resources with links to business where 
opportunities arise.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  LinC Project

Initial committed projects identified 
in the Implementation Plan 

Funding Roundtables/Multi Year 
Agreements/Alliance models 
LEADS: Councils/Govt Agencies
To Develop (1-3 years)

(NB. The implementation plan  
contains other proposed projects  
and ideas to be developed)

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

63

PARTICIPATE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4   Snap Send Solve

Snap Send Solve is a free smartphone app used by the Waimakariri District, 
Selwyn District, and Christchurch City councils to help make reporting issues 
easy, thereby facilitating participation and empowering community members.  
If residents spot something in the district such as a pothole, vandalism, litter or a 
damaged footpath, it can be instantly reported from a mobile phone. The report 
is then allocated to the relevant Council department.

4   Eastern Vision

Eastern Vision is a group of community leaders focused on the regeneration 
of the eastern flatland suburbs of Christchurch. It advocates for community 
participation in regeneration decisions which is informed by robust science and 
technical information and integrated planning. The organisation established 
a website EVO::SPACE which provides a one-stop-shop platform to engage 
members of the public, collate and map proposals for the east, and generate 
an analysis report and map of community aspirations. The website acts as a 
forum for community empowerment by providing information which supports a 
greater understanding of the ongoing ideas for the regeneration of the eastern 
suburbs of Christchurch. The website was complemented by a seven-part TV 
series Eyes East which remains available for viewing online. Eastern Vision 
aims to help communities create a big-picture plan for the whole of the east 
that is widely supported and that will still work in 100 years’ time. To support 
this, the organisation has developed, and will continue to develop, relationships 
with government and other agencies to make information readily and reliably 
available online for members of the community.

5   LinC Project 

The LinC Project (Leadership in Communities) is facilitated by Leadership Lab to 
support local leaders and recognised change agents drawn from the voluntary, 
non-governmental organisations, and central and local government sectors 
across Greater Christchurch. Objectives of the LinC Project include increasing 
knowledge, skills and confidence as well as strengthening collaborations at a 
community level, including projects and initiatives that build local connections 
and wellbeing. 

During 2015, this 10-month, strengths-based leadership programme worked with 
40 leaders from diverse communities of interest across Greater Christchurch. 
A second group of 45 leaders began the programme in December 2015, 35 of 
these from community organisations and 10 from government organisations. 

Funding and other support for the LinC Project have been contributed by the New 
Zealand Red Cross, Rātā Foundation (formerly Canterbury Community Trust), 
Ministry for Social Development, Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority 
(Community in Mind Strategy), the Wayne Francis Charitable Trust, the Tindall 
Foundation, Christchurch City Council, Selwyn District Council, Waimakariri 
District Council, Ara Institute of Canterbury (formerly Christchurch Polytechnic 
Institute of Technology and Aoraki Polytechnic) and the University of Canterbury.

 

 

 

 

 

5   Student Volunteer Army (SVA)

The Student Volunteer Army was created in 2010 through a Facebook page for 
those wanting to volunteer in response to the September earthquake. Throughout 
all the major earthquakes, more than 11,000 students were mobilised to clear 
liquefaction and offer support for other organisations and for residents.

The movement has spread to more than eight countries and is focused on young 
people being involved in volunteering as a way to inquire, problem solve and 
contribute to the community. In 2016, the Student Volunteer Army launched 
‘Serve For NZ’ to mobilise people to volunteer on public holidays, instead of just 
waiting for a disaster.

5   Friday Night All Stars (Rangiora)

This recently-created basketball All Stars 
event, developed as part of the North 
Canterbury Basketball league, aims to 
create an avenue for deeper community 
engagement and provide a public platform 
where participants can realise their dreams. 
The All Stars event involves a large public 
sporting fixture which features key young 
and emerging players from “north and 
south”. This event has created strong 
interest and participation from the wider 
community and has had a very positive 
impact on community connection and 
celebration. This initiative was supported 
by the LinC (Leadership in Communities) 
Project in 2015.

5   Lyttelton Harbour TimeBank

TimeBanks have worked very effectively in some communities and provide 
a means of both engaging with, and encouraging participation across a 
community. TimeBanking is a way of trading skills in a community that is not 
based on money, but rather on time as a measurement tool. TimeBanking can be 
used by individuals or groups to trade skills and fill in each other’s gaps/needs 
through non-financial means. Project Lyttelton set up New Zealand’s first ever 
TimeBank. Participants have built up a local marketplace of members’ skills and 
abilities, creating a publicly-available community skills inventory. The Lyttelton 
Harbour TimeBank has been operating for 11 years and boasts more than 700 
members.

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

65

Goal 3
PROSPER

Whāia te iti kahurangi,  

ki te tūohu koe,  

me he maunga teitei.

Be ambitious in our aspirations. 

 

WE ARE PROSPEROUS BY  

SUSTAINING THE VITALITY OF 
THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT, 

FOSTERING INNOVATION  
AND ATTRACTING PEOPLE

Ka pū te ruha,  

ka hao te rangatahi.

Seek innovative, creative  
and resourceful solutions.

PROSPER

© EOS Ecology, www.eosecology.co.nz

WE ARE PROSPEROUS BY SUSTAINING 
THE VITALITY OF THE NATURAL 
ENVIRONMENT, FOSTERING INNOVATION 
AND ATTRACTING PEOPLE 

Why this goal is important to resilience in Greater Christchurch

Prosperity covers an array of values and wellbeings including tangible measures, 
such as material wealth, as well as measures of health and the notion of eco-
system service benefits. The resilience of Greater Christchurch’s prosperity is 
based on sustaining our environment, nurturing people to maximise their potential, 
diversifying our output (particularly by embracing innovation to generate higher 
value output) and making connections nationally and internationally. 

TOHUNGATANGA 
Recognising the value of experience, 
expertise and the pursuit of 
knowledge and ideas that will 
strengthen and grow individuals, 
whānau and communities. 

Whānaungatanga remains as important as ever to establish and develop trading 
partnerships. Our ability to contribute quality products, skills and knowledge in 
international partnerships can help protect us from global economic changes. 
At a strategic level, building relationships with global consumers is essential in 
attracting tourism, people and ideas that support a modern innovative economy. 

Attracting new people, while still supporting and nurturing our own people, 
is essential to rebalance our ageing population and workforce. Investing in 
community, recreational, environmental and cultural facilities and services, as 
well as being able to offer good jobs and a safe healthy environment, helps retain 
existing residents and attract young skilled migrants. 

Tohungatanga is at the heart of innovation and our ability to respond to the 
pace of technological change. The world is experiencing rapid inter-connected 
technological, societal, environmental and geo-political change which creates 
both opportunities and challenges for individuals, businesses and cities. Greater 
Christchurch is well-positioned to respond to these challenges and opportunities 
with strong education and research infrastructure that can support and foster 
innovation. Many ideas, businesses and social enterprises were borne out of 
the Canterbury Earthquake Sequence and provide an important foundation for 
building prosperity. 

Underpinning a prosperous economy is kaitiakitanga. Greater Christchurch 
is situated among a stunning backdrop of hills, mountains, rivers and beaches. 
Centuries ago, it was this rich, natural abundance that first drew people to 
our region. Today, our natural environment remains our most important asset, 
underpinning our regional agricultural economy, attracting visitors and new 
residents from around the world, and providing essential ecosystem services. 

Government agencies and councils support the two guiding principles by 
working together to build confidence and invest in people and enterprises. 
Taking steps to safeguard the restoration of our natural environment will 
support the foundation of our prosperity. Effective relationships with Ngāi Tahu 
will be founded on supporting growth and diversification of Māori business, 
improving skills, and collaborating in new ventures.

KAITIAKITANGA 
Working strategically to protect the 
environment for the use, enjoyment 
and prosperity of present and future 
generations.

WHĀNAUNGATANGA  
Respecting, fostering and maintaining 
relationships with each other.

 

Under this goal, three 
programmes of action are 
focused on how we will: 

6    CONNECT INTERNATIONALLY

7    FOSTER A CULTURE OF 

INNOVATION

8    SUSTAIN THE VITALITY OF 

OUR NATURAL ENVIRONMENT

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

69

PROSPER

CONNECT INTERNATIONALLY

6

Building strong connections is 
essential for the flow of people, ideas 
and resources into and around Greater 
Christchurch. We already have good 
local business networks and support 
systems, which provide a foundation 
for further sharing of knowledge 
and the development of stronger 
commercial partnerships. Further 
improvement of the breadth and 
depth of our international connections 
can build more integrated trading 
and research partnerships. Without 
relationships, our products and 
opportunities are faceless, unknown 
and perceptually ‘risky’ to consumers 
around the world.  

The number of people retiring will 
increase from 25,000 to 30,000 per 
year over the next decade. At the 
same time the proportion of people 
under 16 is projected to remain 
static over the next 20 years. While 
technology may take up some of this 
gap, employers may face increasing 
skill shortages and rapidly rising  
labour costs that may threaten our  
economic base.  

The infrastructure that connects 
Greater Christchurch to the world 
is important to all sectors of our 
economy. Continued investment in 
our international airport and Lyttelton 

Port are important for exporting 
businesses, tourism and provide 
opportunities to further leverage 
international connections.

Resilience Value
Our economy remains strongly 
influenced by our ability to export 
primary sector products and resources, 
and increasingly on tourism. Growing 
the flow of people, ideas, and 
resources to realise new opportunities 
can soften the impact from global 
economic shocks and maintain 
Greater Christchurch’s relevance and 
competitiveness into the future.

Challenge/Opportunity 
(see pages 32–34)

Level of Resilience Building 
(see page 37)

Actors and  
Networks

Related 
Programmes

Government agencies 
Councils
Business support agencies 
Private sector
Christchurch International 
Airport Ltd
Lyttelton Port Company
Telecommunications 
companies

1

3

7

10

Links with actions/programmes of other 100RC network cities

ROTTERDAM

The volume and flow of people, ideas and resources into the city region is 
essential to growing prosperity in the twenty-first century. Rotterdam is aiming 
to increase the proportion of highly skilled and educated residents through 
communication and promotion, removing barriers, and developing an inventory of 
best practice. Greater Christchurch is eager to learn from the Strong Shoulders –  
Strong City programme to understand how we can remain relevant and 
competitive in the future.

ACTION 6A 

ACTION 6B 

ACTION 6C 

Build strong national and international 
connections as foundations to attract 
people, develop markets and stimulate 
collaboration. 

What will we be doing? Greater 
Christchurch needs to sell itself and its 
opportunities to individuals worldwide as 
a place of high-quality output, research 
and innovation, and natural beauty. We 
will develop initiatives that market Greater 
Christchurch to overseas investors, visitors 
and workers. We will also provide support to 
overseas investors and use people to match 
investors with opportunities. 

What outcomes do we expect to see?  
A clearer Greater Christchurch story being 
told overseas that articulates the investment 
opportunities and the attractions for visitors 
and talent. Better access to capital will 
help develop products and services, while 
international collaborations will be more 
common. The number of tourists using 
Christchurch as a gateway to the South Island 
and New Zealand will continue to increase.

Successful current examples of activities 
include: 
•  Ministry of Awesome 
•  Canterbury International Education 

Leadership Accord 

•  Antarctic Support Programme
•  Sister Cities

Initial committed projects identified in the 
Implementation Plan 
•  Guangdong Strategy  

LEAD: Christchurch City Council 
Committed (1-2 years)

•  Attraction Strategy  

LEAD: Canterbury Development 
Corporation 
In Progress (1-2 years)

•  Antarctic Strategy 

LEAD: Christchurch Antarctic Office 
Committed (within 1 years)

(NB. The implementation plan contains other 
proposed projects and ideas to be developed)

Future proof our physical 
infrastructure to safeguard 
our economic performance 
and overseas trading 
connections. 

What will we be doing? Continued 
investment in the growth of 
Lyttelton Port through the 
Lyttelton Port Recovery Plan, 
and maximising the numbers of 
passengers through Christchurch 
International Airport will help 
build connections to international 
markets. The sub-regional roll out 
of fibre broadband and ongoing 
dialogue around a South Island 
international data cable link will 
better connect our communities 
and businesses to the world. 
Beyond these, further evaluation 
of the risks to our infrastructure 
networks are important to 
maintaining our resilience. 

What outcomes do we expect 
to see? Increasing use of our 
upgraded port and airport capacity 
as conduits for trade. Growth 
of business and service activity, 
particularly in more remote 
communities, using communication 
technology. Investment in 
alternative/backup digital 
capability.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Lyttelton Port Recovery Plan
•  Christchurch Airport Open Sky 

Policy

 

Invest in attracting and 
retaining workers from 
overseas to supplement 
our ageing workforce and 
stimulate new business ideas. 

What will we be doing? Retaining 
the estimated 25,000 workers 
who came to Christchurch to work 
on the rebuild, and harnessing their 
skills in other industries, could be 
an important economic legacy of 
the earthquakes. The other key 
opportunity lies in retaining more 
of our own young people and 
attracting others from overseas 
through our universities and 
tertiary education institutes, which 
are building strong links to local 
businesses. 

Actions, initiatives and projects 
contained within Programmes 1, 2 
and 3 of this Plan are important to 
activities around skills and training. 
The availability of affordable, 
quality housing, attractive living 
environments and a sense of 
belonging are all important for 
young people and migrants 
considering a future in Greater 
Christchurch.

What outcomes do we expect 
to see? Continued post-rebuild 
interest in migration to Greater 
Christchurch, higher levels 
of conversion of work visas 
to permanent resident visas 
and citizenship among rebuild 
workers, stability and decline in 
the outflow of younger people, 
further alignment of education and 
business to build the skills of the 
future.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Starts with a Smile

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

71

PROSPER

FOSTER A CULTURE OF INNOVATION

7

Our economy has low wage and 
productivity rates relative to other 
cities in Australasia, and is dependent 
to a great degree on the regional 
agricultural industry which itself is 
strongly influenced by volatility in 
international commodity markets. 

With a large, stable talent pool fed 
by three major tertiary institutions 
and seven Crown Research Institutes 
we can broaden the base of our 
economy, act as a magnet for 
talent and investment, and help our 
companies build stronger links into 
world markets. Developing higher 
value products is a key opportunity for 
our economy, as demonstrated by the 
agricultural research sector.   

and the commercialisation of ideas 
is an important part of developing 
our knowledge and creative sectors. 
Projects are already emerging in the 
form of Innovation Hubs which seek 
to co-locate research, businesses 
and commercialisation expertise to 
drive new product development and 
associated spin-offs. 

The pace of change in technology, 
social trends and product 
development means that 
obsolescence is an increasing risk. 
For our companies, investment is 
precious and we need to ensure that 
the decisions we make today build in 
enough flexibility and adaptability to 
cope with change. 

Creating environments which 
stimulate and enable innovation 

Social enterprises represent an 
underdeveloped part of our economy 

that can create more sustainable 
employment, improve the quality of 
our environments and empower the 
community and voluntary sector to 
deliver services better.

Resilience Value
Becoming an urban region that 
champions imaginative, creative, 
innovative people can help transform 
our economy by developing higher 
value products, processes and new 
technologies. In turn, these can make 
us less reliant on supply chains that are 
forged around selling bulk products 
onto volatile world markets. Keeping 
abreast of technological change is also 
important in keeping our products and 
places relevant to people – local or 
international.

Challenge/Opportunity 
(see pages 32–34)

Level of Resilience Building 
(see page 37)

Actors and  
Networks

!

Government agencies 
Private sector
Business support agencies 
Councils

Related 
Programmes

1

5

10

2

6

11

Links with actions/programmes of other 100RC network cities

NORFOLK

Greater Christchurch shares with Norfolk, the goal of closer collaboration across 
local, university, private and nonprofit sectors. Championing imaginative, creative, 
innovative people can help transform our economy, and nurturing the city’s 
entrepreneurs is key to achieving this transformation. Norfolk has demonstrated 
this by their actions to launch a resilience lab and sustain a vibrant business 
community.

ACTION 7A 

Support an environment that 
enables innovation and creativity 
as means to diversify our economy 
and add value to  
our production. 
What will we be doing? We will 
collaborate to further develop innovative 
and creative networks, simplify processes 
and procedures that stand in the way of 
commercial development of opportunities, 
and support research activities that 
can improve productivity or open new 
horizons. Showcase events bring people 
together in relation to particular fields of 
activity and provide opportunities to share 
ideas and develop collaborations. 

The SMART City concept takes the idea 
of local innovation precincts further by 
embedding technology and enabling 
opportunities for commercial and public 
sector organisations to collaborate. For 
government agencies and councils this 
will allow better choices about resource 
uses in the urban environment, extend 
real-time control of city assets and make 
shared use of commercial systems. 

What outcomes do we expect to see? 
An increasing diversity of employment 
activities, increases in productivity, 
national and international scale product 
development collaborations, emergence 
of national and international research 
capabilities, increasing wages/incomes, 
continued high levels of entrepreneurial 
activity and small business formation.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Business Friendly Councils 
•  EPIC and the Innovation Precinct
•  Powerhouse 
•  FoodSouth 
•  GreenHouse 
•  Creative Industries Support Fund
•  AgResearch

Initial committed projects identified in 
the Implementation Plan 
•  SMART City  

LEAD: Christchurch City Council 
Committed (1-2 years)

•  Regional Innovation Strategy Projects  

LEAD: Canterbury Development 
Corporation 
Committed (0-2 years)

(NB. The implementation plan contains other 
proposed projects and ideas to be developed)

ACTION 7B 

ACTION 7C 

Support the emergence of 
the social enterprise sector as 
partners in driving change in 
our communities.
What will we be doing? We will 
support the development of the 
embryonic social enterprise sector 
and host the Social Enterprise 
World Forum in 2017, exposing 
us to international best practice, 
stimulating collaboration and 
building global relationships.

What outcomes do we expect to 
see? Emergence of social enterprises 
as positive agents of change, 
adjustments in traditional markets, 
evolution of public services into the 
not-for-profit sector.

Initial committed projects identified 
in the Implementation Plan 
Hosting of the 2017 Social 
Enterprise World Forum  
LEAD: Akina Foundation 
In Progress (within 1 year)

(NB. The implementation plan contains 
other proposed projects and ideas to be 
developed)

Commissioning of research 
and regular reviews of global 
and technological trends to 
maintain awareness of fast 
moving change.
What will we be doing? 
Government agencies, councils and 
the private sector will collaborate to 
understand how change will affect 
how we work, travel, communicate, 
access services and manage 
our environment to encourage 
smart choices and avoid wasteful 
duplication or inefficiencies in 
resource use.

What outcomes do we expect 
to see? Informed private, 
public and community sector 
organisations, willingness to take 
up and experiment with new ideas, 
effective future-proof investment in 
innovation that exploits emergent 
technologies.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Canterbury Development 

Corporation and Canterbury 
Employers’ Chamber of 
Commerce speaker and events 
programmes

Initial committed projects identified 
in the Implementation Plan 

Future Ready Programme of 
Action  
LEAD: Christchurch City Council 
To Develop (1-3 years)

(NB. The implementation plan contains 
other proposed projects and ideas to be 
developed)

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

73

PROSPER

SUSTAIN THE VITALITY OF  
THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT

Our prosperity is built on the quality of 
our natural environment. Settlement 
of the Greater Christchurch by Māori, 
and subsequently European colonists, 
relied on the quality and diversity 
of environmental assets, including 
fisheries, clean water, productive land 
and access to the coast. Today these 
assets remain critical to our economy, 
providing us with food, water, fibre, 
and timber, and regulation of climate 
and air quality.  

Mahinga kai is a cornerstone of Ngāi 
Tahu identity that relates to the 
hunting and gathering of natural 
resources which fed whānau and kept 
them together. Urban development 
has reduced opportunities to access 
mahinga kai and impacted the quality 
of the natural environment from 
which it is sourced. As with other 
urban areas, Greater Christchurch 
relies on food supply chains which  
are dominated by external sources 
subject to national and global price 
and supply issues.  

Without our natural environment 
we would have no prosperity. Over 
time the quality of our natural 
environment has deteriorated with 
loss of indigenous biodiversity, 
draining of wetlands and waterway 
pollution. For our natural environment 
to continue to support us we need to 
better understand our role within the 
ecosystem and continually care for the 
health and life of our surroundings.

Central to this programme is 
collaboration to align resources, build 
knowledge and develop consistent 
approaches which acknowledge the 
fact that we all have a stake in our 
environment and that everyone’s piece 
of the environment has value.

Resilience Value
Resilient communities are rooted 
in resilient environments. Sourcing 
food locally reduces the cost, 
carbon footprint and dependency on 
global markets, supports local food 

8

producers and improves accessibility 
to healthy food. Greater Christchurch 
is blessed with a variety of natural 
assets which are irreplaceable. Just 
as strong interpersonal relationships 
can assist in building resilience, 
close connections with our natural 
surroundings help us have perspective 
in facing everyday stresses and can 
sustain us in times of crisis and need.  

Fostering closer connections 
between people and place will 
increase our ‘urban awareness’ 
of nature’s ecosystem services. 
Strategic identification, protection 
and enhancement of ‘blue’ and ‘green’ 
corridors will help rebuild nature’s 
resilience, supplement the costs of 
urban and rural infrastructure (e.g. 
stormwater management), and buffer 
us against acute shocks and chronic 
stresses.

Challenge/Opportunity 
(see pages 32–34)

Level of Resilience Building 
(see page 37)

Actors and  
Networks

Related 
Programmes

!

E

Government agencies 
Councils
Ngāi Tahu
Community groups
Voluntary groups
Business community 
Local people 
Individuals

1

5

7

10

2

6

9

11

Links with actions/programmes of other 100RC network cities

MELBOURNE

Prosperity is not solely a transactional product of commerce economics. A thriving 
natural environment can return innumerable resilience dividends to a city and its 
residents. Melbourne has recognised this through their flagship action to develop 
and protect the city’s green canopy through their Metropolitan Urban Forest 
Strategy. There is likely strong value in learning from the Strategy’s principles and 
case studies to help sustain the vitality of the natural environment throughout 
Greater Christchurch.

ACTION 8A 

ACTION 8B 

Develop projects and initiatives 
that support restoration of 
indigenous biodiversity across an 
ecological network.

What will we be doing? We will establish 
a partnership to drive co-ordinated action 
across the multitude of environmental 
interests (funders, regulators, academics, 
volunteers) across Greater Christchurch. 
This partnership can be a collective 
advocate for restoring biodiversity, driving 
short term activity, and helping identify 
strategic priorities for a sustainable 
ecological network.

What outcomes do we expect to 
see? Co-ordinated restoration and 
enhancement of indigenous biodiversity 
in Greater Christchurch to provide a 
sustainable ecological network and 
biodiversity corridors. An increase 
in indigenous biodiversity in Greater 
Christchurch.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Mahinga Kai Exemplar

Initial committed projects identified in 
the Implementation Plan 

Develop a Local Biodiversity 
Partnership 
LEAD: Urban Development  
Strategy Partnership 
To Develop (1-3 years)

(NB. The implementation plan contains other 
proposed projects and ideas to be developed)

Build capacity to source food from 
our local and urban environments 
to sustain our people and 
rediscover our relationships with 
nature.

What will we be doing? Within our 
natural environment, particularly 
our rivers, we will re-evaluate the 
modifications we have made and the 
maintenance programmes we use to 
encourage the restoration of their 
ecological functions. Beyond this we 
will develop public and community 
land, or temporarily lease private land, 
to develop community gardens, edible 
forests, rongoā (medicine gardens) and 
other projects involving local resource 
production.

What outcomes do we expect to see? 
Re-emergence of local food supply 
chains and a local food economy. Wider 
participation in community gardening that 
supplements local market gardening and 
larger-scale agriculture. More community 
gardens that act as productive and social 
hubs where people can build relationships 
and more healthy lifestyles.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Christchurch Food Resilience Policy
•  Whaka-inaka
•  Food Resilience Network Action Plan
•  Edible Canterbury – campaign to 
develop interest and collaboration

Initial committed projects identified in 
the Implementation Plan 

Ōtākaro Orchard 
LEAD: Food Resilience Network 
Committed (1-3 years)

(NB. The implementation plan contains other 
proposed projects and ideas to be developed)

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

75

PROSPER

 

 

 

 

 

 

6   Ministry of Awesome

Ministry of Awesome connects awesome ideas with the resources to turn them 
into reality – people, funding, mentors, government entry points and enthusiasm, 
all with the aim of rippling awesome through our community to strengthen, 
encourage and inspire. Ministry of Awesome believes that an awesome city is 
by definition a compelling place to invest, create businesses, seek employment, 
as well as a place of love, laughter, and delight. Ministry of Awesome offers a 
variety of services including: start-up/idea mentorship, events, consulting, co-
working spaces, and ecosystem development and engagement. It fosters the 
entrepreneurial ecosystem with regular events and educational workshops, runs 
two welcoming and inspiring Awesome HQ co-working spaces, and offers one-on-
one support through the Start-Up Activator Programme. 

One of the ways it has helped to engage, activate, and connect the community in 
Greater Christchurch is by partnering with Canterbury Development Corporation 
to create a web-based ecosystem map that connects entrepreneurs and 
innovators to the resources they need. Whether they are working on an idea, 
preparing to launch a new business, or seeking support for an existing venture, the 
Innovation Map can put entrepreneurs in touch with the people they need to talk 
to. Key partners include the Christchurch City Council and the Rātā Foundation.

6   Starts with a Smile

The Canterbury Employers’ Chamber of Commerce campaign encourages the 
general public to make new migrants feel welcome and to stay by ‘starting with 

a smile.’ The campaign encourages Kiwi-born residents of 
Christchurch to interact with the new arrivals from overseas, 
many of whom have formed part of the migrant workforce for 
the Canterbury Rebuild and who will permanently migrate to 
New Zealand. 

This collaborative project includes a wide range of partner 
and supporting organisations such as the Rātā Foundation, 
the Canterbury District Health Board, schools, construction 
companies, law firms, and Christchurch City Council. Marketing 

material appears on billboards, posters, media and social media, and through 
a travelling “Smile Couch” which visits different locations to get people from 
different ethnic backgrounds talking.

6   Christchurch Airport  

Open Sky Policy 

This policy has removed regulatory access issues for foreign carriers to use 
more of the available air capacity into the South Island through Christchurch 
International Airport. Singapore Airlines, Air New Zealand, Virgin and Jetstar 
have increased their services or are using larger aircraft, while Qantas, China 
Airlines and China Southern are running new services. Passenger numbers now 
exceed pre-earthquake levels.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7   EPIC

EPIC recognises that “innovation is a major driver of economic growth in 
Canterbury, helping create high value jobs, pay for local services and raise our 

region’s quality of life.” The EPIC (Sanctuary) building was 
established to house local Canterbury businesses displaced by 
the Canterbury earthquakes. EPIC was the first commercial 
venture back into the Central City red zone, following the 
Re:Start Mall, and was a finalist in the 2013 Champions of 
Canterbury Business Awards. EPIC now has 30 information 
and communications technologies (ICT)/high-tech focused 
companies under its roof, and is home for between 250–300 
full-time workers engaging in active collaboration with each 
other every day.

7   powerHouse

While great value is stored in the knowledge held by research-based 
organisations, it is internationally recognised that the process of transforming 
academic knowledge into successful business models, commercial operations 
and sales is extremely challenging. powerHouse is a company based in 
Christchurch that has developed a unique model resulting in a high rate of 
commercial “spin-out” companies from academic institutions. 

In New Zealand last year, the 100 high-value Technology Investment Network 
manufacturing and technology companies (TIN100), some of which are based 
in Canterbury, grew by 5% to record revenues of NZ$7 billion. Exports grew by 
4% to over NZ$5 billion. powerHouse’s purpose is to create more high-value 
technology companies like these. Canterbury Development Corporation was an 
establishment shareholder of powerHouse when the company was formed in 
2008 to meet an identified market failure at that time, to provide a source of 
capital for intellectual property-based, early-stage ventures.

8   Edible Canterbury

Edible Canterbury evolved partly as a result of the Canterbury earthquakes 
when more people became aware both of how insecure our current food system 
is, and of the incredible opportunity presented through the availability of good 
land to grow more food locally.

A food resilience hui was held at the University of Canterbury in 2013, co-
hosted by Soil and Health Canterbury and the Rangiora Earthquake Express. 
This resulted in a Food Resilience Network, which in 2014 established Edible 
Canterbury.

The agencies involved in Edible Canterbury include those focused on social, 
cultural and ecological issues, social enterprise, public health, and local 
government, enabling us to examine the question of food availability from a wide 
range of perspectives.

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

77

PROSPER

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8   Mahinga Kai Exemplar Project

Te Rūnanga o Ngāi Tahu, Ngāi Tūāhuriri, the Avon Ōtākaro Network and the 
 
Canterbury Waterways Research Centre are working together to develop an 
exemplar project for the protection and enhancement of mahinga kai values 
along the Avon River/Ōtākaro corridor at Anzac Drive Reserve. 

Mahinga kai is the Ngāi Tahu term for foods and other natural resources, the 
places where those resources are found, and the philosophies and practices 
that surround them. The abundance of mahinga kai is indicative of kaitiakitanga 
(good stewardship, sustainable management) values in action, and the effective 
collaboration of local community leaders, groups and individuals to act in respect 
of their environment.

The Mahinga Kai Exemplar project aims to increase understanding of mahinga 
kai and kaitiakitanga values along the river in the hope that others adopt these 
philosophies and practices in their own community projects and backyards. 
Relationships have been developed with schools, Canterbury University, 
community members and businesses, NGOs, polititians and local and central 
government agencies. 

Project leaders want to bring local people together to help restore the natural 
heritage values of their neighbourhood and, in the process, help create a healthy, 
safe and welcoming environment that provides opportunities for education, 
learning, physical and spiritual sustenance.

8   Whaka-Inaka : Causing Whitebait

Inaka (Galaxias maculatus) is the South Island dialect for inanga (whitebait). It is 
one of the five whitebait species in NZ and the only one found in the Ōtākaro/
Avon River. Whitebaiting in heartland New Zealand is one of our quintessentially 
“kiwi” pastimes. Year in, year out, whitebaiting draws fishers and their families to 
river mouths and has clear social, cultural, recreational and economic wellbeing 
outcomes for whānau and families throughout the country. 

The Whaka-Inaka : Causing Whitebait project was initiated in February 2016 in 
recognition of the degraded state of inaka habitat in Ōtautahi/Christchurch,  
and a strong desire to take a lead in promoting an improvement to this situation. 
The project aims ultimately to increase the number of inaka in local rivers, 
believing that this will have significant wellbeing outcomes for local whānau  
and families.

Our strategy has been to build greater awareness and understanding of the 
habitat needs of inaka, which require dense vegetation and shade along the 
margins of the river on the high ‘spring’ tides of late summer and autumn. 
“By laying their eggs in vegetation along the banks during the highest ‘spring’ 
tides, inaka can keep their eggs safe from predators in the river,” says Dr. Mike 
Hickford, research biologist at the University of Canterbury (Marine Ecology 
Research Group), and project partner for Whaka Inaka. “This however makes 

© EOS Ecology, www.eosecology.co.nz

them more vulnerable to changes to the riverbanks where they spawn. At the 
end of the day, if there is no habitat, then there will be no eggs and ultimately  
no fish.” 

 

In February of this year, 192 straw bales were installed at 34 sites along the 
lower reaches of the Ōpāwaho/Heathcote River and around Lake Kate Sheppard 
on the Ōtākaro/Avon River. “The bales act like the Hotel Hilton for inaka,” says 

project leader and principal scientist at EOS Ecology, 
Shelley McMurtrie. “They provide much-needed spawning 
habitat for inaka and effectively highlight where they 
prefer to lay their eggs if the right conditions were 
present. Our monitoring and research will be able to 
paint a clear picture to the community and Council where 
whitebait spawn. We have monitored the bales for egg 
presence and abundance from February to June, and now 
have a much clearer understanding of where whitebait 
would spawn.” 

“The project is a model of collaboration between 
science, education, iwi, business, government and non-
government organisations,” says Te Marino Lenihan, a 
customary fisheries representative for Ngāi Tūāhuriri 
and Whaka-Inaka project partner. “One of the greatest 
outcomes of our project is the number of local schools 
that have helped us monitor the straw bales every week 
from February to June. Our children are having fun in 
the field and learning by doing. I see them as the next 
generation of river guardians, and hope that our legacy 
for them is a river full of fish. Just imagine how well-off 
our city will be when that happens.”

Photos at left © EOS Ecology, www.eosecology.co.nz

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

79

Goal 4
UNDERSTAND

Mate kāinga tahi;  
Ora kāinga rua.

Plan for the worst, hope for the best.

 
 

WE UNDERSTAND OUR RISKS 

TO BE BETTER PREPARED 
FOR FUTURE CHALLENGES

E hara taku toa, i te toa takitahi,  

engari he toa takitini.

Success is not the work of one  

but the work of many.

UNDERSTAND

WE UNDERSTAND OUR RISKS  
TO BE BETTER PREPARED FOR 
FUTURE CHALLENGES 

Why this goal is important to resilience in Greater Christchurch

Following the Canterbury earthquakes, individuals, communities and agencies 
in Greater Christchurch have an improved understanding of the need to be 
prepared for emergencies, as well as the many impacts of earthquakes. The 
key to planning for the future resilience of the region is to help people draw on 
consistent knowledge about other risks and hazards that they can understand 
and relate to.

TOHUNGATANGA 
Recognising the value of experience, 
expertise and the pursuit of 
knowledge and ideas that will 
strengthen and grow individuals, 
whānau and communities. 

Understanding the risk from disaster is a worldwide issue. In 2013 the UN 
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon warned that economic losses from disasters 
were out of control. The direct global financial costs of disasters from 2000 to 
2013 amounted to an estimated US$2.5 trillion. As a response, the 2015 World 
Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction approved the Sendai Framework which 
has four priorities for action to prevent and reduce exposure to disaster risks – 
understanding, managing/avoiding, mitigating and preparing. 

For Greater Christchurch, tohungatanga is essential as a basis to be better 
prepared for future challenges, while rangatiratanga is needed to help our 
communities make complex decisions about how we prepare for the future. 
Strong leadership is needed to help us balance our responses, which will need to 
consider risk reduction, risk transfer and risk acceptance. 

To truly understand and prepare for future risks, we will need to make informed 
decisions about our vulnerabilities, how much we are prepared to pay as 
communities and households to safeguard and offset those risks, and whether 
we can live with the residual risks. This approach applies to the risks of natural 
hazards, financial decisions, travel, sporting activities and even everyday activities 
like driving a car or crossing the road. 

These decisions inevitably cross over into kaitiakitanga – how our generation 
makes important calls on the future use of land and resources, and safeguards 
our lives and livelihoods.

In addressing the two guiding principles, government agencies and councils 
have a central leadership role in developing a shared platform of knowledge and 
understanding. People need to know the risks and be involved in decision-making 
on responses that affect them and future generations. Effective relationships 
with Ngāi Tahu will be founded on joint decision-making around risk that takes 
a wider cultural perspective on the relationships between people and places, 
embedding the role of stewardship during our lifetimes.

KAITIAKITANGA 
Working strategically to protect the 
environment for the use, enjoyment 
and prosperity of present and future 
generations.

 

RANGATIRATANGA  
Leadership through collaboration, 
maintaining a high degree of personal 
integrity and ethical behaviour in all 
actions and decisions.

Under this goal,  
three programmes of action 
are focused on how we will: 

9    IMPROVE COMMUNITY 
UNDERSTANDING AND 
ACCEPTANCE OF RISK

10    MANAGE THE RISKS WE FACE

11    SECURE OUR FUTURE IN 
THE EASTERN PARTS OF 
CHRISTCHURCH

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

83

UNDERSTAND

IMPROVE COMMUNITY UNDERSTANDING  
AND ACCEPTANCE OF RISK

9

International debate around climate 
change over the last 30 years has 
demonstrated that complex science, 
vested interests, inconsistent 
messaging from governments and 
technical experts can combine to 
dilute debate about necessary change.

Greater Christchurch faces a range 
of risks that we collectively need 
to understand and make decisions 
about. Better conversations with the 
community to improve understanding 
and acceptance of risk is a key 
component of community resilience 
planning.

Every day we live with risks – when we 
cross the road, when we use electrical 
appliances, when we participate in 
sports and recreational pursuits. 
Risk does not stop us doing things 
but, consciously or sub-consciously, 
we consider how we go about those 
activities to minimise the risks involved. 
In facing decisions about how we 
respond to the threats and hazards 
that face our communities, people 
need to understand the available 

information and then come to their 
own and collective conclusions about 
levels of risk they are prepared to 
accept and potentially take steps that 
lessen risks. 

This level of understanding and 
acceptance is essential to better 
inform decisions across all types of 
risk – what is the expected impact, 
consequence, and the likelihood of 
that happening? Armed with this 
understanding people can then decide 
what they are willing to accept and the 
steps they need to make to minimise 
the exposure to effects, or the level of 
impact they can absorb or offset by 
other means.

The use of quantitative risk 
assessment in land use planning 
and resilience needs considerable 
discussion and community 
involvement. This approach has 
been applied in the Port Hills since 
the earthquakes. Even when the 
theoretical levels of risk were 
published, most people were prepared 
to accept the risk. Perhaps this was 

because, intuitively, people recognised 
that such a low probability was 
“almost incredible”: theoretically 
possible but not expected to occur.

Resilience Value
By building capacity to understand 
and accept risk, everyone will have 
the same knowledge of the stresses 
and shocks that we are likely to face. 
Enabling engagement between the 
community and councils in responding 
to managing risk will help build trust 
between the community and decision-
makers. Understanding risk is more 
than natural hazard risk, it includes the 
full spectrum of shocks and stresses, 
including financial, organisational, 
biological and technological 
threats, as well as opportunities for 
Greater Christchurch to achieve 
its aspirational goals, in particular 
prosperity. Improved understanding 
and acceptance of risk will improve 
the ability to manage risk and 
decisions around this, empowering 
individuals to make decisions.

Challenge/Opportunity 
(see pages 32–34)

Level of Resilience Building 
(see page 37)

!

Actors and  
Networks

Everyone

Related 
Programmes

1

4

8

2

5

10

3

7

11

Links with actions/programmes of other 100RC network cities

MEDELLÍN

By building capacity to understand and accept risk, we can collectively build better 
knowledge of the stresses and shocks that we are likely to face, and in turn, be 
better prepared to face them. Medellín is running a community risk management 
pilot project aimed at social mapping of risk, early warning networks, co-ordination 
and information sharing, as well as prevention and mitigation strategies. Learnings 
and outcomes from the pilot would be valuable in helping Greater Christchurch 
communities improve their understanding and acceptance of risk.

ACTION 9A

ACTION 9B

Openly engage the community 
to explore risk scenarios as a 
foundation for dialogue about risk 
reduction.

What will we be doing? We will engage 
with communities so that people can 
understand their vulnerability to shocks 
and stresses, showing people realistic 
scenarios of how particular hazards 
might affect them. This information 
will be confronting and may cause 
anxiety, but only with such information 
can households and communities have 
meaningful discussions around risk 
management and what risk acceptance 
actually means.

What outcomes do we expect to see? 
Open and transparent engagement with 
people using understandable information 
to help them make decisions and balance 
the consequences of action or inaction 
in relation to risk management (explored 
under Programme 10) and preparedness 
and resilience.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 

•  Dudley Creek and Flockton Basin Flood 

Mitigation Schemes

Develop and agree objective risk 
evidence and definitions in a  
non-technical language as starting 
points to engage the community 
about risks they face.

What will we be doing? Our councils 
and government agencies will continue 
to work together to develop and gather 
an objective base of evidence about the 
risks we face, being open about the origin 
of data and assumptions that are used. In 
developing this resource, methodologies, 
data collection and analysis will be 
subject to robust peer review and 
challenge. A non-technical community 
focused review will take perspectives 
from a broad community viewpoint to 
frame subsequent debate using widely-
understood language.

What outcomes do we expect to see? 
Accepted baseline sources of information 
about areas of risk that councils and 
Central Government can draw from; 
community confidence in and a firm 
understanding of risk; recognition of 
different perspectives about levels of risk 
acceptance.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Canterbury Geotechnical Database

Initial committed projects identified in 
the Implementation Plan 

Canterbury Natural Hazard Risk 
Reduction Group  
LEAD: Canterbury Regional Council 
Ongoing

(NB. The implementation plan  
contains other proposed projects  
and ideas to be developed)

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

85

UNDERSTAND

MANAGE THE RISKS WE FACE

10

Existing and emerging threats 
impose risks on our communities, 
our infrastructure, our economy and 
our environment. Having understood 
these threats, making decisions 
about how we can manage risk can 
be challenging. Many decisions will be 
personal – threats to life, job security, 
level of stress. For others, particularly 
organisations, the main approaches 
used involve managing the financial 
risk of uncertainty. Spending money 
on protective mechanisms (from 
engineering works to stockpiling 
vaccines) to reduce the consequences 
of an event is a cost. For unlikely events 
this can be very expensive and may sit 
lower in lists of priorities for funding. 
But, for higher frequency events where 
the disruption and recovery costs are 
greater, a more balanced economic 
case can be made. This influences how 

much we avoid or adapt to mitigate to 
protect ourselves. 

areas is the way we can be prepared 
to face challenges and change.

There is uncertainty around the 
availability and cost of natural disaster 
insurance in the future. Following the 
earthquakes insurance policies have 
changed which may result in lower 
rates of cover (in California only 10% of 
residential properties have earthquake 
cover) and incomplete cover which will 
have consequential implications for 
recovery from future events.

Across the range of risks that 
people and communities in Greater 
Christchurch face, the steps we can 
take to manage risk are important 
to how we live our lives, go about 
our business and plan for the future. 
Where risks remain, building resilience 
into our homes, business and urban 

Resilience Value
Planning to avoid, manage and 
mitigate risks from threats and 
hazards helps us maintain a stable 
economy, thriving communities and 
healthy environments. We cannot 
eliminate all the risks we face and 
must accept that in some cases, 
responses to future events might 
compromise the value we place on our 
current quality of life. Transferring risk 
and being prepared for the impact of 
an event, forecasted or unexpected, 
sudden or gradual, is the key to 
resilience. If these tools cannot reduce 
risk to acceptable levels then we need 
to make bold decisions for our future 
to avoid loss of life and livelihoods.

Challenge/Opportunity 
(see pages 32–34)

Level of Resilience Building 
(see page 37)

Actors and  
Networks

Related 
Programmes

!

E

Government agencies
Councils
Ngāi Tahu
Community sector
Business support groups
Private sector
Insurance industry
Technical specialists

2

6

9

1

5

8

11

Links with actions/programmes of other 100RC network cities

NEW ORLEANS

We cannot eliminate all the risks we face, and where tools cannot reduce risk to 
acceptable levels we must invest effectively to address threats and hazards. New 
Orleans has developed a program to assist property owners make improvements 
through low-interest loans and tax incentives. Christchurch’s shared storm 
and flood risks mean there is strong interest in learning from successful storm 
resilience improvements in New Orleans to effectively manage risk.

ACTION 10A

ACTION 10B

ACTION 10C

Develop a risk reduction 
framework to help us invest 
efficiently in interventions 
around our threats and hazards.

What will we be doing? Led by 
councils and government agencies, 
we will develop risk reduction 
projects and programmes to feed 
into conversations with affected 
communities that highlight the 
compromises involved in managing 
risk. Stop-banks, stormwater pumping, 
seismic land strengthening and flood 
storage basins are examples where 
innovation continues to evolve, 
and there are opportunities to trial 
projects. We will draw knowledge 
from international experience 
including cities within the 100RC 
network. Where necessary, councils 
will look to put in place urban design 
responses that can be included today 
to cope with tomorrow, and regulation 
that ensures we avoid particular land 
uses in vulnerable locations, and 
standards to improve the safety and 
adaptability of structures will  
be pursued.

What outcomes do we expect to 
see? Well-framed risk reduction 
projects and initiatives are developed 
and proposed to help communities 
understand the options available to 
offset risk. In extreme cases, the range 
of options available may not be cost-
effective to implement.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Establishment of District Plan 

standards around minimum floor 
heights for new buildings in flood-
prone areas

•  Increase in Building Code seismic 

standards 

•  Dudley Creek and Flockton Basin 

Flood Mitigation Schemes

Review the role and use of 
insurance as a tool for risk 
transfer.

Support community 
preparedness in response to 
acceptance of risk.

What will we be doing? With central 
government and council leadership, 
we will work together to inform the 
right balance of risk mitigation and 
risk transfer that keeps insurance 
premiums in an affordable range. 
Information and education about the 
value and types of insurance is also 
important to help people understand 
the extent to which they can protect 
their interests. This is particularly 
important for the small business 
sector.

What outcomes do we expect 
to see? The ongoing availability 
of understandable and affordable 
insurance products that give people 
clear understanding of how their 
interests are protected. In areas of 
higher risk, premiums may increase 
but insurance products with 
exclusions may still be appropriate for 
those able to accept particular risks.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  covered.org.nz – insurance industry 

education resource for consumers

Initial committed projects identified 
in the Implementation Plan 
  Resilience Scorecards  

LEAD: Councils 
To Develop (1-2 years)

(NB. The implementation plan  
contains other proposed projects  
and ideas to be developed)

What will we be doing? We will 
encourage communities to get 
involved with planning for how they 
can be more resilient to respond 
to disruptive events. Civil Defence 
will continue to provide advice, 
while information and updates to 
recommendations on emergency 
supplies will continue to be issued to 
make whānau and businesses more 
resilient and adaptable. There are links 
to the neighbourhood and community 
building actions in Programme 1 
(Connect People) and Programme 4 
(Build Participation).

What outcomes do we expect to 
see? Communities understand the 
consequences of various events and 
know what to do whatever the event, 
including drawing on assistance from 
their immediate community and 
insurers.

Successful current examples of 
activities include: 
•  Selwyn gets ready
•  Canterbury Civil Defence and 

Emergency Management (CDEM)

•  Collaboration for Business 

Resilience

Initial committed projects identified 
in the Implementation Plan 

Community Level Resilience 
Planning  
LEAD: Councils and Civil Defence 
Ongoing

(NB. The implementation plan  
contains other proposed projects  
and ideas to be developed)

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

87

UNDERSTAND

RISK TERMINOLOGY

Risk reduction draws together the measures we can take to limit our  
exposure to hazards or the impact of hazards should they affect us.  
There are three sub-strategies within this broad area.

AVOIDANCE 
not taking a 

particular course 

of action in 

response to the 

risks faced

MANAGEMENT 
accepting the risks 
that are there and 
modifying the way  

in which we do 
things to reduce 

our exposure or the 

impact of them

MITIGATION 

conscious investment  

in measures that,  
if called upon, will 
protect, absorb or  
offset exposure of 

people to the impacts  

of known risks

Risk transfer is a form of risk reduction mitigation (typically in the form of 
insurance or contingency funding) that addresses the aftermath of an event 
rather than addressing the cause, but is important in underpinning our 
resilience. 

The New Zealand Earthquake Commission (EQC) scheme underpins the 
availability of affordable insurance for residential property and assets in 
New Zealand. As a result around 70% of losses from the major earthquake 
events of the Canterbury Earthquake Series were covered. This compares 
to 20-30% in Japanese and Chilean earthquake events in 2010 and 2011, 
and 35% for the last major US earthquake at Northridge in 1994. Costed 
premiums will reflect the level of risk in the knowledge that losses suffered 
will be equivalently compensated. 

Risk acceptance is a state of being that influences the level of risk 
reduction and risk transfer, and ultimately the level of preparedness, we are 
willing to invest in and it can change as we use other responses.

Preparedness describes the everyday steps we can take to bounce back 
from the impacts of an event in the knowledge that risk reduction cannot 
insulate us from all magnitudes of hazards, and that insurance will not be 
able to help us during and in the immediate aftermath of an event.

SECURING OUR FUTURE IN THE  
EASTERN PARTS OF CHRISTCHURCH

The population of Eastern 
Christchurch faces a range of 
challenging socio-economic issues 
including poorer educational 
attainment, below average incomes, 
higher levels of people on state 
benefits and poor quality social 
housing. The 2011 earthquake hit this 
area the hardest. Ground shaking 
led to widespread liquefaction and 
subsidence resulting in 6.3 square 
kilometres becoming so damaged that 
the government had to step in and buy 
nearly 7,300 homes. 

Securing our future in the eastern 
parts of Christchurch will require a 

multi-party collaboration to resolve a 
range of different issues that include 
social and economic problems, future 
risks from climate change, particularly 
sea level rise and the reuse of 
earthquake damaged land, and water 
management. Our response needs 
to consider the cost as well as the 
potential benefits for the community.

Resilience Value
This programme represents a meeting 
point of all the goals and programmes 
contained within the Resilient Greater 
Christchurch Plan. The future of 
Eastern Christchurch will be founded 

11

upon a clear understanding of the 
risks that the area faces and from 
there a participative process can best 
determine how hazards are managed, 
new prosperity is built and how 
existing and new communities are 
connected.  

Key strands of activity are summarised 
under each of the four themes of 
narrative below around which this 
plan’s goals are framed.

Challenge/Opportunity 
(see pages 32–34)

Level of Resilience Building 
(see page 37)

Actors and  
Networks

Related 
Programmes

!

Government agencies
Regenerate Christchurch 
Councils
Ngāi Tahu
Community sector
Business support groups
Private sector
Insurance industry
Technical specialists

1

3

5

7

9

2

4

6

8

10

Rebuild by Design provides innovative ways to connect design, funding, and 
implementation strategies for a more resilient future. Having set standards in post 
disaster planning following Hurricane Sandy, Rebuild by Design brings together global and 
local expertise, regional leadership and local vision to tackle multidimensional problems 
that harness and cultivate strong stakeholder support and government leadership to 
create processes that drive systemic change transforming our built environment in ways 
that are design-driven and equitable.  
http://www.rebuildbydesign.org/

89

UNDERSTAND

Eastern Christchurch is a substantial 
area of the city lying between the 
Central City and the coast. These 
pages highlight some of the threats 
and challenges that the area faces.

PROFILE:  EASTERN CHRISTCHURCH

¯

Area Population
% Māori and Pacific Populations
Number of most socially deprived* people 
Average House Price 
Households earning under        NZ$100,000
                                                        NZ$50,000
% households renting their home
% of households drawing state financial support  
Qualifications      % without qualifications

Redwood

Papanui

% university level qualifications

(as defined  

Christchurch 

NZ$335,000 NZ$445,000

Parklands

East  

on map)
62,500

29% / 34%

23,500

84%
48%
43%
Burwood
28.5%
29%
12%
70%

City
(20%)
8% / 3%
29,375 

Land Elevation

< 50cm

50–100cm

100–150cm

Waimairi

Beach

73%
38%
35%
17%
20%
21%
79%

New 
Brighton

% Households with internet access
* Defined as falling within the lowest 20% of the New Zealand population according to the 
2013 indices of multiple deprivation (University of Otago).

Ilam

¯

LAND ELEVATION

The elevation bands shown on the 
adjacent map are not hazard zones 
and should not be interpreted as such. 
This mapping may aid in identifying 
areas at risk as the sea rises. Local 
characteristics, such as coastal 
landforms or transport corridor 
embankments will influence the 
extent of areas at risk.  

Riccarton

CHRISTCHURCH

Bromley
Land Elevation

Redwood

Cashmere

Southshore

< 50cm

50–100cm

100–150cm

Redcliffs

Woolston

Hillsborough

Parklands

Waimairi

Beach

Sumner

Papanui

Burwood

Source: Preparing New Zealand for 
rising seas: Certainty and Uncertainty. 
Parliamentary Commissioner for the 
Environment (November 2015).

Ilam

Riccarton

CHRISTCHURCH

Bromley

Woolston

Hillsborough

Cashmere

New 
Brighton

Lyttelton

Southshore

Redcliffs

Sumner

0

1

2

4

Kilometres

The elevation bands shown on this map are not hazard zones 

Low-lying coastal land in Christchurch.

Lyttelton

Avon River

Flood risk following 
intense/ prolonged 
rainfall event, poor 

water quality  

Residential  
Red Zone

Cleared former 
residential land  
prone to seismic 
liquefaction – now 

state owned.

Extent of before 
and after aerial 
photos below

N

SHIRLEY

NEW 

BRIGHTON

LINWOOD

CENTRAL 

CITY

Statistical area  
of quoted data

Low Lying Coast
Threats from  

sea level rise, coastal 
erosion, inundation  

and tsunami  

Waste water 

treatment plant 

and ponds

Underperforming 
Commercial Centres
Mall dominated centres 

with higher levels  
of vacancy, crime, 
reducing retail  

turnover.

CHANGE IN THE RESIDENTIAL RED ZONE 2011–2016

2011

2016

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

91

UNDERSTAND

Towards Regeneration 

Since 2011 the worst affected areas 
in eastern Christchurch have been 
the subject of intervention by the 
Government. Homes on damaged land 
have been bought up and demolished 
leaving once flourishing riverside 
communities as vacant land with 
roads and garden trees being the only 
residual features. 

Groups within the community 
have already taken the initiative in 
developing ideas for the future of 
these areas. These include:
•  opportunities to integrate the 
river(s) and the ocean into the 
urban environment as part of a 
strategy to adapt to sea level rise

•  large scale visitor attractions/ 
water-based sporting venues

•  community-led plans and place-

making initiatives 

•  resilience demonstration projects 

In 2015, the Government and the Mayor 
committed to a new regeneration 
phase in for the city where more 
collaborative planning for the future 
would focus on building back places 
for people rather than just buildings. 
To drive this a new entity, Regenerate 
Christchurch, was created in April 2016.

Reflecting this context, actions 
under this programme are the least 
developed in this plan. During 2016/17, 
the newly formed Regenerate 
Christchurch will set out it initial list of 
priorities and projects which the living 
Implementation Plan (at the back of 
this document) will pick up. 

Consistency and collaboration across all tiers of government

The governance structure put in place for Regenerate Christchurch is consistent 
with this plan’s principle around driving consistency and collaboration across 
tiers of government. 

Regenerate Christchurch is a body established by the 
Greater Christchurch Regeneration Act 2016 and jointly 
funded by the Crown and Christchurch City Council.

Overseen by an appointed board, it has a lifespan of five 
years, following which it may become a wholly City Council 

entity. Its purpose is to support a vibrant, thriving Christchurch that has economic, 
social and lifestyle opportunities for residents, businesses visitors, investors  
and developers. 

Its objectives are to lead the regeneration of Christchurch City by engaging 
effectively with communities, stakeholders and decision-makers to achieve its 
purpose. In doing so it will work collaboratively with other organisations to achieve 
regeneration outcomes.

Its functions are to develop visions, strategies and Regeneration Plans to assist 
in achieving regeneration. It will provide advice to the Minister on planning 
instruments and changes, be an independent source of advice on regeneration 
activities to the City Council and the Minister and also facilitate increased 
investment. Regenerate Christchurch will also comment on regeneration 
outcomes, interventions and the contributions of Ōtākaro Limited and 
Development Christchurch Limited, giving them (and other organisations) advice 
on regeneration outcomes being sought.

A meaningful Treaty partnership with Ngāi Tahu

The future of Eastern Christchurch is a key area of focus for Papatipu Runanga. 
The majority of residential red zone land within Greater Christchurch sits beside 
waterways that have significant cultural value for local Ngāi Tahu. This programme 
therefore sits at the heart of the principle of building a meaningful Treaty 
partnership with Ngāi Tahu. 

One longstanding issue for Papatipu Runanga relates to the taking of the  
Te Ihutai (Māori Reserve 900) fishing easement in 1956 in order to build the 
city’s waste water treatment facility (see New Zealand Gazette, 1956, pp 364, 
1179). The reserve and its fishery was considered so valuable that the owners 
would not accept the money offered by the Crown in consideration for its loss. 
The natural resources of Christchurch’s wetlands and waterways were once 
so rich that there were seven significant pre-European settlements scattered 
strategically along the Ōtākaro/Avon River and its tributaries. The development 
of the Christchurch Residential Redzone presents an unprecedented opportunity 
to protect and enhance these habitats and species such that they may once 
again feed local communities and reinforce this ‘cornerstone’ of local culture.

How will our Resilience Goals influence this programme?

43% of  

households  

renting compared 
with 35% in the  

city overall

50% fewer 

households with 
access to a motor 
vehicle than the 
rest of the city

CONNECT

The sense of community is strong  

in many eastern parts of Christchurch.  

Any decisions about the future need to involve  
its people, whether they are long-established,  
have temporarily moved away or are new to  
the area. Preparing people to participate in  
a process of large-scale change is critical  

to mobilising their input and building  
their ownership in a better future.

1 in 5 

Christchurch 
residents live in 

the East

PARTICIPATE

42% of the  

Samoan speakers 
and 32% of the city’s 

Māori language 

speakers

People in eastern communities have  

differing views and perspectives. There are  

highly circumspect communities who have been 
promised positive change over the years but have 
not seen it. In contrast there are highly motivated 
communities, willing to work together to deliver 

projects and safeguard the way of life their 
communities want. The challenge across the  
area is to openly set expectations with the 

community, and where capacity and capability  

exists or emerges, use that drive and  

energy to build ownership of  

issues and projects.

PROSPER

UNDERSTAND

Economic regeneration of the east,  

specifically through the Ōtākaro/Avon River  
Corridor out to New Brighton, will depend upon 

exploiting the opportunities that are now available –  

not least the available, although damaged,  

red-zoned land and the multi-agency commitment  
to regeneration. The two strands of making new  

and relevant connections to people across  
Greater Christchurch as well as visitors from  
New Zealand and overseas, combined with  

fostering an environment that attracts  

innovation and new ideas, are  

particularly valid for the  

future of this area.

Eastern Christchurch, perhaps more  

than any other part of urbanised Greater 

Christchurch, is exposed to multiple hazards.  

The level of risk from those hazards will vary from  

sudden and extreme inundation from relatively  
rare tsunami events, to very real projections of  
sea level rise expected in the next 50-100 years.  

The level of risk able to be managed through 
different building standards and mitigation,  

the level of insurance that people have access to,  

or areas we may need to retreat from are  

all issues that will shape the  

future for the area.

18km of  

Avon-Ōtākaro river 
and 443 hectares 

of residential  
red zone land

10% slower 
business and 
employment 
growth since  

2000

In 2013, 80% of  

Christchurch’s most 

socially deprived people 

lived within Eastern  

Christchurch

Over 1,900  

properties protected  

by approximately  
10km of temporary  

stopbanks

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

93

UNDERSTAND

 

 

 

 

 

 

9   Canterbury Natural Hazard  

Risk Reduction Group

The Canterbury Natural Hazard Risk Reduction Group was formed in 2016 to 
develop and implement a regional approach to managing natural hazard risk in 
Canterbury. In developing a regional approach to managing natural hazard risks, 
the Group will consider matters around facilitating communication on hazards, 
co-ordination of information-sharing, exploring opportunities to reduce hazard 
risk and identification of tools that can result in reduction of hazards  
in Canterbury.

10   Collaboration for Business Resilience

Following a disaster, businesses need to stay in business and keep contributing 
to the economic and social wellbeing of their local communities. Once this is 
achieved, they may also be able to assist the wider community’s recovery by 
providing goods, services, facilities, skills or other resources. As the Canterbury 
recovery has progressed, the many different ways businesses can contribute 
have become evident. 

Resilient New Zealand was formed by a group of like-minded organisations who 
want to help make New Zealand more resilient to natural disasters. Members 
of Resilient New Zealand include: BECA, BNZ, IAG, New Zealand Red Cross, and 
VODAFONE. Resilient New Zealand aims to encourage businesses to embed 
resilience in their existing planning structures and practices so they are better 
able to contribute to recovery. Resilient New Zealand is also aiming to work with 
central and local government to develop governance frameworks that enable 
the capabilities, resources and people of businesses to be better utilised in a 
recovery.

improve their own resilience and contribute towards community resilience

Resilient New Zealand’s first project, Contributing More: Improving the Role of 
Business in Recovery (2015), looks at how businesses can:
• 
•  play a greater leadership role in recovery
•  collaborate with other parties to better enable recovery.

The report draws on discussions with more than 50 business, central and local 
government, and community leaders involved in the Canterbury earthquake 
recovery and highlights a number of lessons on business resilience, leadership in 
recovery and collaboration. It also includes recommendations to both the public 
and private sector on how they can help facilitate businesses contributing more 
to future natural disaster recoveries. Initially, the report will be used to engage 
with a range of stakeholders to publicise their findings and to promote their 
recommendations. Where possible, Resilient New Zealand would like to work in 
partnership with organisations to implement their recommendations.

Canterbury

 

 

 

10   Canterbury Civil Defence Emergency 

Management (CDEM) Group

Canterbury CDEM is a partnership of local authorities, emergency services and 
other organisations tasked with ensuring the effective delivery of civil defence 
emergency management in Canterbury. As well as preparing and co-ordinating 
responses, CDEM is tasked with preparing a Group Management Plan for the 
region which includes monitoring and evaluation of risks and hazards as well as 
delivering information and education to the public.

11   Ōpawahō Heathcote River Network

Ōpawahō Heathcote River Network is working to enhance and restore the whole 
of Ōpawahō-Heathcote River as an ecologically healthy river that people take 
pride in, enjoy and care for. Since its inception in 2015, the network has worked 
to connect stakeholders up and down the river to work toward this goal. The 
network has established sound relationships with other community groups, 
and has received support from Environment Canterbury and Christchurch City 
Council. In May 2016 the network co-ordinated (along with the Ihutai Estuary 
Trust and the Ōtākaro-Avon River Network) the first whole-of-river clean-up 
for the entire catchment. Current mid-term activities are focused on building 
the strength and capacity of the network itself (e.g. developing a charter and 
a website), mapping potential walkways, and supporting potential ecological 
restoration projects. This initiative was supported by the LinC (Leadership in 
Communities) Project in 2015.

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities
Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

95
95

Let’s get to work!
KI TE HOE

KI TE HOE

Mike Gillooly

KI TE HOE – LET’S GET TO WORK! 
with Chief Resilience Officer Mike Gillooly

Everyone has a role to play in building  
a Resilient Greater Christchurch

We are made up of many proud communities working together to recover 
from one of New Zealand’s worst disasters in modern times. Resilience is what 
enables people to survive, adapt and thrive in the face of acute shocks and 
chronic stresses and thriving in these conditions is what offers us so much 
opportunity. We are an amazing region that is globally connected by sea and 
air, we have modern hospitals, quality academic institutions, a thriving regional 
economy grounded in agriculture, manufacturing, IT and tourism. We have many 
reasons to be optimistic about our future. 

All participants in the development of this plan have contributed a wealth of 
expert knowledge and a ready understanding of the drivers and dependencies 
of factors of resilience. The contribution of the not-for-profit sector to this 
resilience plan, across all the dimensions of resilience, was recognised at all 
workshops. Specific issues raised during the development of this plan recognised 
the need to build a more trusting relationship between communities and 
decision-makers, nurture existing community networks and support systems 
and recognise the impact and opportunity that the migrant rebuild workforce 
brings to Greater Christchurch. Repeatedly, there was overlap of key issues 
– health, wellbeing, infrastructure, environment, economy and society – as 
interdependent dimensions of resilience, underpinned by the need for strong and 
effective leadership. Resilience for Greater Christchurch is a journey, not an end 
in itself. This plan provides a road map for us continue on the path to building a 
more resilient future.

LEARNING FROM THE 
OTHER CITIES  
IN THE NETWORK
One of the benefits of our 
membership of the 100 Resilient 
Cities network is our ability to not 
only share what we have learned but 
also to learn from others. In this plan 
we have highlighted a number of 
cites with whom we share common 
goals and challenges. As we progress 
into implementation we will look 
to other cities in the network like 
Melbourne which has established “The 
Resilient Melbourne Delivery Office” 
to oversee the implementation of the 
Resilient Melbourne Strategy, and 
San Francisco which has established 
an Office of Resilience and Recovery, 
both tangible examples of initiatives 
being led by their own Chief 
Resilience Officer. 

GETTING INVOLVED
The aim is that most of the new 
projects from here onwards are 
derived from community-level action, 
including ideas from individuals. Only 
by learning how we can help ourselves 
and others can we learn to become 
resilient. 

A starting point for assistance and 
advice is our Chief Resilience Officer. 

The Chief Resilience Officer will 
advocate for co-ordination across 
the Urban Development Strategy 
partners, broker solutions with 
different organisations, draw on 
technical support resources, negotiate 
funding and work directly with 
community representatives helping to 
develop and sustain initiatives.

Contact the Chief Resilience Officer 
if there are programmes, actions or 
new initiatives that you, your whānau, 
your community or your organisations 
could lead or have a role in.

Resilient@greaterchristchurch.org.nz

greaterchristchurch.org.nz

@resilientGC

IMPLEMENTATION
On the following page is an 
Implementation Plan which is  
not fixed. 

The Implementation Plan contains 
an initial list of detailed projects and 
initiatives that actors and networks 
across Greater Christchurch may 
pursue in building resilience.

The listed projects and initiatives 
consist of those that were already 
being planned, could be developed 
or were identified as opportunities 
when this plan was being developed. 
Alongside each are identified actors 
and networks who will play a key  
role in delivering specific projects  
and initiatives.

This plan is designed to inspire 
and encourage people to lead 
or participate in resilience-
building programmes, actions and 
initiatives. Over coming years the 
Implementation Plan will be reported 
on and republished containing new 
actions and initiatives. This will draw 
on involvement and engagement  
with the community identifying  
how we can all take steps to build  
our resilience.

Some new projects will be driven 
by the Chief Resilience Officer 
(CRO) and these are identified in 
the Implementation Plan, along with 
specific partners and timeframes.

The Greater Christchurch Urban 
Development Strategy Partnership 
will oversee the implementation of 
the wider plan while also leading 
some of the projects themselves. The 
partners are committed to leveraging 
and maximising existing sources of 
funding to achieve resilience benefits, 
including the estimated NZ$40 billion 
of post-earthquake reinvestment 
that will go into our infrastructure, 
buildings and urban environments.

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

99

Implementation

RESILIENCE IMPLEMENTATION PLAN

This part of the plan is where detailed projects and activities are catalogued. 

The Implementation Plan is the living part of this document. Over successive 
years projects and initiatives will be rolled out and in turn replaced by new ideas 
and activities.

Format 
The Implementation Plan is in a table-based format that lists the individual 
projects and initiatives under each Goal and Programme, with each line then 
linking back to the actions contained in the preceding part of this plan.

The shaded action lines are in progress or committed to and will be delivered in 
the stated timeframe. 

Those that are unshaded will be commenced in the medium term and are either:

•  existing successful initiatives that can be scaled to other areas or groups 

across Greater Christchurch, or

•  new ideas or projects that require further scoping, development and 

funding sources. 

All initiatives have the potential to contribute towards the resilience goals and 
involve a wide range of partners. 

You will be able to access updates to this Implementation Plan  
and reporting of progress from our website.

Consistency a n d c

o ll a

R
E
P
S
O
R
P

b o r a t ion across all tiers of g

CONNECT

o

v

e

r
n

6

7

3 

2 

8

11

10

1 

 9

5 

4 

m

e

n

t

I

P
A
R
T
C
P
A
T
E

I

The adjacent diagram, discussed further on page 38, is reproduced here to remind us 
 of the inter-related nature of the programmes and activities. In delivering action under  
one programme we will typically expect there to be dividends across multiple goals.

A 

m

eaningful Treaty partne r s h i p   w it h N gāi Tahu

UNDERSTAND

101

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesCONNECT GOAL
We are connected communities living in adaptable places.

Action Project or Initiative 
PROGRAMME 1.  Connect People
1A

Support Stocktake
Undertake a brief area wide review of 
resources, activities and sources of support 
(and the methods of their delivery) as a 
means to develop signposting information/ 
wider use of activities to build community 
connections.

Lead

Partners

Status/
Timeframe Related programmes

To be 
confirmed

Councils
UDSIC
Mayoral Forum

To develop 
1-2 years

9  Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

1A/1B Community Led Grants 

Councils

Community 
groups
Red Cross

In Progress/ 
Committed 
Ongoing

8  Foster a culture of 

innovation

Provides funds to organisations working to 
build resilience and to support community 
recovery and wellbeing in earthquake-
impacted communities.
Create formal connections between the 
psychosocial work lead by CDHB and the 
Resilient Greater Christchurch Plan
Ensuring psychosocial work is embedded 
across organisations and is supporting 
communities’ psychosocial wellbeing is seen 
as the core business of many so it remains 
sustainable in the long term.
Psychosocial review
Review the success of psychosocial 
initiatives being pursued under the 
Community in Mind Strategy to identify 
further refinements and future funding by 
Ministry of Social Development.

1B

1B

1B

CDHB

UDSIC
Communities
Government 
agencies

Committed 
Within 2 
years

4  Build participation and 
trust in decision-making

5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

8  Foster a culture of 

innovation

CDHB/ 
Healthy 
Christchurch

Government 
agencies 
Care 
organisations 
Community 
groups

To develop 
1-2 years

4  Build participation and 

trust in decision-making   

5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

Resilience Checklist for individuals 
A comprehensive resource for individuals or 
households identifying actions people can 
take to support themselves and others in 
times of hardship.

CCC

Community 
groups

To develop 
1-2 years

2 Create adaptable places
9  Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

PROGRAMME 2.  Create adaptable places
Develop/implement new centre 
2A
development plans
Develop plans for new centres that 
incorporate urban design principles to 
improve community connectedness and 
overall wellbeing.

Councils 
(by district)

Communities
Local business

In progress/  
Committed 
Ongoing

1  Connect people
3  Improve the Quality, 

Choice and Affordability 
of Housing

2A/2B Urban Intensification plans

Develop bespoke area-based plans to 
advance and facilitate co-ordinated and 
high-quality residential intensification within 
urban Christchurch.

Councils  
(by district)

To develop 
2-5 years

CCC
Ōtākaro Ltd
Development 
Christchurch Ltd
Private sector
Communities
Regional Council

8  Foster a culture of 

innovation

9  Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

3  Improve the Quality, 

Choice and Affordability 
of Housing

8  Foster a culture of 

innovation

CONNECT GOAL continued

Action Project or Initiative 
2A/2B UDS Review

Lead
UDSIC

Review of the sub-regional land use 
planning and wellbeing strategy to 
integrate high level resilience which will 
carry through into funding, service and 
regulatory planning processes.

2B

2B

2B

2C

2C

Future Public Transport
Exploration of future options to extend 
and develop Greater Christchurch Public 
Transport networks.
Transport Innovation Fund
Contestable fund to stimulate local ideas 
that can be developed to help encourage 
and improve use of sustainable transport 
modes.
Accessibility Charter
Develop a charter with the goal of 
stimulating ‘a recovery and rebuild of 
Greater Christchurch that results in a 
genuinely accessible and liveable city 
for all of its citizens to participate in and 
belong to.’ Its purpose will be to get buy-in 
from the development industry to look at 
how to increase accessibility in building, 
particularly private commercial builds, and 
influence accessibility audits of designs and 
construction.  
Collaborate with communities to create 
healthy, safe and welcoming facilities 
and places
Promote the use of independent 
accessibility and crime prevention audits for 
all proposed major developments. 
(NB strong links to actions under 2A, 4B, 5B 
and 10)

Devolution of Local Public Assets
Review arrangements around devolved 
responsibility for public assets and facilities 
and looking at opportunities to partner 
with capable community groups who can 
take on decisions about fundraising and 
spending, and can harness the energy of 
local volunteers.

Partners
All Councils
CDHB
Ngāi Tahu
NZ Transport 
Agency
Government 
departments
All Councils
NZ Transport 
Agency

Status/
Timeframe Related programmes
Committed 
Commences  
2017

4  Build Participation and 
Trust in Decision-Making

9  Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

Committed  
1-2 Years

4 Build Participation and 

Trust in Decision-Making

Individuals and 
entrepreneurs

Committed 
Initial Pilot 
in progress

4  Build Participation and 
Trust in Decision-Making

8  Foster a culture of 

innovation

UDS 
Transport 
Group

CCC

Earthquake 
Disability 
Leadership 
Group

CCC
Commercial 
developers
Development 
industry

Committed 
1-2 years

2 Create adaptable places

CCC
SDC
WDC

Councils

CPTED
Universal Design

Ongoing

To develop 
2-3 Years

Government 
agencies
Community 
sector
Voluntary sector
Communities

1  Connect People
5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

7  Foster a culture of 

Innovation

8  Sustain the vitality of 

the natural environment
4  Build participation and 
trust in decision-making

5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

7  Foster a culture of 

innovation

103

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesCONNECT GOAL continued

Action Project or Initiative 
Partners
PROGRAMME 3.  Improve the Quality, Choice and Affordability of Housing  
3A

Councils

Lead

Status/
Timeframe Related programmes

To develop 
1-2 years

1  Connect people

EECA
Private landlords
CDHB

Voluntary targeted rate for Home 
Insulation 
Explore the use of a Voluntary Targeted 
Rate scheme to assist residents with 
upfront costs for insulating their home.
Consistent monitoring of residential 
development across the Greater 
Christchurch Council administrative 
areas
Develop a consistent and comprehensive 
set of measures around the existing 
housing stock, newly built homes, land 
supply and the proposed development.

4  Build participation and 
trust in decision-making

Councils 
(through 
the UDS 
Partnership)

Committed 
Working 
Group to 
Commence 
2017

MBIE
Housing New 
Zealand
Community 
Housing 
providers
EECA
House builders

Regular review of Greater Christchurch 
Housing Market Assessment (or 
equivalent cross partnership resource)  
Regular periodic publication of an area-
wide market assessment to inform housing 
planning and delivery.

Develop a Greater Christchurch Housing 
Policy
A Greater Christchurch Housing Policy 
could bring together strands of policy that 
unite the sub-region and help drive better 
co-ordination of different types of housing 
that more specifically address identified 
housing needs.

UDS Partners Ministry of Social 

Development
Housing New 
Zealand
Community 
Housing 
providers
CDHB
Ngāi Tahu
EECA
House builders

UDS Partners Ministry of Social 

Development
MBIE
Housing New 
Zealand
Community 
Housing 
providers
CDHB
EECA
House builders

To develop 
1-3 years

2  Create adaptable places 
4  Build participation and 
trust in decision-making

To develop  
1-3 years

2  Create adaptable places
4  Build participation and 
trust in decision-making

3A 
3B

3B

  3B

PARTICIPATE GOAL
We are a community that participates in shaping our future.

Action Project or Initiative 
PROGRAMME 4.  Build participation and trust in decision-making
4A

Councils

Lead

Research, develop and build on effective 
models and methods for community 
involvement in local governance
Community Advisory Panels and Citizen’s 
Juries are examples of ways in which 
opportunities can be created to help 
people participate and influence decision- 
making as well as build trust between the 
community and decision-makers. 
Other examples include co-creative 
planning, consultation portals where 
people can comment and offer feedback on 
comments in real-time. 
Make decision-making accessible and 
inclusive for all communities of interest 
and identity
Translation services, sign language 
interpreters, cultural sensitivity in the 
managing of meetings are all examples 
of how decision-making can be made 
accessible and inclusive for a range of 
communities. An inclusion lens can be 
applied to all stages of decision-making 
from planning and design to approval. 
Open Source Data
Providing more public sector, private sector 
and academic data in Open Source formats 
proactively and allowing decision-making 
to become more transparent. Make Greater 
Christchurch data available to interests in 
the community to use data to inform their 
own initiatives or ideas and even spawn 
new innovations.

Devolve more responsibilities for local 
issues or facilities
Identifying ways of empowering 
communities and users with a stake in 
decision-making and delivering change 
that affects the quality of community 
facilities and places. This may include more 
delegation, with governance agreements,  
to Christchurch’s Community Boards.

CCC
SDC
WDC

Councils,  
Government 
and  
other public 
institutions

4A

4B

4B

Partners

Status/
Timeframe Related programmes

Community 
groups
Interest groups
SEWN

To develop 
1-3 Years

1  Connect People
2 Create Adaptable Places
5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

7  Foster a culture of 

Innovation

CCC
SDC
WDC

Community 
boards 

To develop 
0-2 Years

1  Connect People
5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

Canterbury 
Lifelines Utilities 
Group
Department of 
Internal Affairs
Statistics New 
Zealand
Land Information 
New Zealand
Community 
boards
Community 
groups

In progress/  
Committed 
Ongoing

To develop 
1-3 years

1  Connect People
2  Create Adaptable Places 
5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

7  Foster a culture of 

innovation

2  Create Adaptable Places 
5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

105

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesPARTICIPATE GOAL continued

Action Project or Initiative 
PROGRAMME 5.  Support Community Organisations and Leaders
5A

Lead

Community 
groups

Expand the use of Time Banks
TimeBanks are currently operating in 
Addington, Belfast, Eastern Bays, Lincoln, 
Lyttelton, New Brighton, Roimata, 
Sumner, Waimakariri. Assessing the wider 
applicability of TimeBanks to share and 
exchange local community skills and 
resources will benefit development of 
resilience in communities.
Place based planning framework 
An emerging framework approach that 
proposes to empower community groups 
to drive localised planning exercises with 
council support being tailored to reflect 
community capacity and capability.
Community Leadership Training 
Review of current community leadership 
training courses and resources with a view 
to increasing opportunities and tailoring the 
content.

CCC

(City Council 
initiative)

Councils

Partners

Government 
agencies
Councils

Status/
Timeframe Related programmes

In progress/  
To develop

4 Build Participation and 

Trust in Decision-Making

7 Foster a culture of 

Innovation

Ongoing 
and 1-3 
years

Community 
groups

To develop 
1-2 Years

2  Create Adaptable Places 
4  Build participation and 
trust in decision-making

To Develop 
1-2 years

1  Connect people
4  Build Participation and 
Trust in Decision-Making

Government 
agencies 
Community 
groups 
Tertiary  
institutions
Rata Foundation 
Akina Foundation 
Red Cross

Community Group/Resource Mapping
Mapping of capacity-building support 
available to community groups and 
networks and volunteers would support 
existing and emerging communities, groups, 
and leaders. This would include valuable 
resources for organisations and individuals 
seeking training, upskilling or a place to 
connect and share skills and resources.
Funding roundtables 
Multi-year service level agreements
Alliance models
Closer working between funding institutions 
and community, charitable, not for profit 
and voluntary groups to work through 
difficult decision-making, longer term 
investment confidence and delivery of 
multiple outcomes are all ways in which the 
partnership between these sectors can be 
strengthened

UDS Partners Ministry of  

Awesome
CDHB
Community 
organisations

In progress/ 
To develop

Ongoing 
and 1-3 
years

1  Connect People  
4  Build Participation and 
Trust in Decision-Making

To develop 
1-3 years

4  Build Participation and 
Trust in Decision-Making

7  Foster a culture of 

Innovation

Councils and 
Government 
agencies

Community 
groups 
Charitable  
organisations 
and volunteers
SEWN
Philanthropy NZ
Red Cross

5B

5B

5B

5C

PROSPER GOAL
We are prosperous by sustaining the vitality of the environment,  
fostering innovation and attracting people.

Partners

Status/
Timeframe Related programmes

Multiple agencies
NZTE
ENZ
Canterbury  
International  
Education  
Industry Accord
CeCC
CDC
Business  
community
CIAL
CCC and other 
Councils
UDS
CCT
Development 
Christchurch
CIAL
Antarctic New 
Zealand
Industry groups
Antarctica NZ
University of 
Canterbury
Christchurch 
International 
Airport
Canterbury 
Development 
Corporation
Christchurch  
City Council
Council of  
Managers of  
National Antarctic 
Programmes 
(COMNAP)
Ministry of  
Awesome
Business  
community

Committed 
1-2 Years/
Ongoing

1  Connect People 
4  Build Participation and 

Trust in Decision-Making  

8  Foster a Culture of 

Innovation

In Progress/ 
To develop 
1-2 Years

1  Connect People 
8  Foster a Culture of 

Innovation

Committed 
0-1 years

4  Build Participation and 
Trust in Decision-Making

8  Foster a Culture of 

Innovation

In Progress/ 
To develop 
1-3 Years

1  Connect people 
8  Foster a culture of 

innovation

Action Project or Initiative 
PROGRAMME 6.  Connect internationally
6A

Guangdong Strategy 
The purpose of the strategy is to establish 
a strategic city to city/region relationship 
with China and continue to support visits 
from Chinese investors.

Lead

CCC

6A

6A

6A

Attraction Strategy
CDC will build on work already underway 
(e.g. CDC’s City of Opportunity booklet) and 
work with its partners to develop initiatives 
to attract skilled migrants, visitors and 
investment into the area.

CDC

Antarctic Strategy 
Enhance Christchurch as New Zealand’s 
centre for the creation and delivery of 
Antarctic and Southern Ocean innovation, 
knowledge and information.

The Antarctic 
Office

CDC

Active connectors
Internationally connected firms tend to 
be more productive, have higher growth 
rates and employ more people; however, 
making connections takes time and 
resources that smaller firms can struggle 
to find. This initiative involves working 
with stakeholders, including the Ministry 
of Awesome, to investigate opportunities 
to increase the capacity and services 
provided by active connectors in Greater 
Christchurch and to provide a ‘landing pad’ 
support to investors. This links with the 
Attraction Strategy.  

107

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesPROSPER GOAL continued

Lead
Councils

Action Project or Initiative 
6B

Securing our Connections 
This project will identify key strategic 
locations across the sub-regional where 
an incident could compromise multiple 
infrastructure networks.  Subsequent work 
may then promote investment in alternative 
more resilient capacity parallel that if 
compromised would result in multiple losses 
of service implications.

Canterbury 
Mayoral 
Forum

6C

Migrant Attraction and Settlement
As one of the seven work streams of 
the Canterbury Regional Economic 
Development Strategy 2015 (CREDS), 
Migrant Attraction and Settlement aims to 
‘‘make the most of the workforce we have 
now”. Over 2016–17 this work stream will 
establish an advisory group and develop a 
strategy to attract, train and retain skilled 
workers, including migrants and their 
families.

PROGRAMME 7.  Foster a culture of innovation
7A

SMART City
Smart City is a Christchurch City Council 
initiative launched in 2015. This initiative 
will use modern digital technologies to 
gather data about how the city is used 
and functions using sensor technology to 
greatly enhance our services, to reduce 
costs and environmental impact and to 
improve contact between citizens and 
government. The initiative can be expanded 
to Greater Christchurch, involving partners 
such as LINZ to implement proof of concept 
projects and to create a business model 
that enables further initiatives in the future.

Partners
Canterbury 
Lifelines Utilities 
Group (CLUG)
Infrastructure 
providers (lines 
companies, 
energy providers, 
telecoms  
companies, 
Lyttelton Port 
and Christchurch 
Airport)
CeCC
CDC
Business  
community

Status/
Timeframe Related programmes
To develop

2  Create adaptable places
9  Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

10 Manage the risks we     

face

To develop/ 
Committed 
1-3 years

1  Connect people
2  Create adaptable places
3  Improve the Quality, 

Choice and Affordability 
of Housing  

7  Foster a culture of 

Innovation

CCC

Land Information 
New Zealand

Committed 
1-5 years

1  Connect people 
2 Create adaptable places
5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

9  Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

Status/
Timeframe Related programmes
To develop  
Committed 
0-2 years

1  Connect people
5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

6  Connect Internationally

Lead
Canterbury 
Development 
Corporation

Partners
CCC
MBIE
Ōtākaro
MOA
Tertiaries
Research 
institutions
Business 
community

PROSPER GOAL continued

Action Project or Initiative 
7A

Implementation of the Regional 
Innovation Strategy 
To provide a distinctive value proposition 
and attraction advantage for business, 
investment and talent.  The key priorities 
are to:
-  Develop strong leadership/co-ordination 
across the regional innovation system to 
make the most of our existing/emergent 
innovation assets.

-  Generate more economic value from 

our ideas and new technologies through 
different commercialisation models and 
support systems.

-  Develop a profile/brand that endorses 

the regional innovation system and is an 
attractor for business, investment and 
talent. 

-  Develop an innovation friendly 

environment that makes it easy to do 
innovative and different things here, 
and for new people to engage with the 
innovation system. 

-  Maximise the innovation and 

commercialisation from our regional 
Public Research Organisations.

7B

7C

Future Ready Programme of action
Explore the opportunity to host a 
programme of projects and actions 
focused on the impact on the community 
and workplace of forecast technological, 
demographic and attitudinal shifts and 
produce briefing papers. This could include:
-  Business Futures project 
-  Innovation Friendly City – explore how 
we leverage our city assets to stimulate 
innovation

-  Economic resilience of low-income 
households – how can knowledge, 
creativity and innovation lift the income 
floor for those working below the living 
wage threshold.

Social Enterprise World Forum 
The Social Enterprise World Forum which 
will be held in Christchurch in 2017 will 
provide a valuable opportunity to be 
exposed to best international practice, 
innovation and global relationships that 
will further accelerate the development 
of the social enterprise sector and place 
innovation in Greater Christchurch on the 
global stage.

Chief  
Resilience 
Officer

CDC
Business  
community 
Community 
groups

To develop 
1-3 years

1  Connect People
5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

6  Connect Internationally
9  Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

Committed 
2017

5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

6  Connect Internationally

Akina  
Foundation

CCC
University of 
Canterbury
Ministry of  
Awesome
CDC
Rātā Foundation
Philanthropy 
New Zealand
Tourism New 
Zealand

109

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesPROSPER GOAL continued

Action Project or Initiative 
7C

Social Enterprise Promotion/Awareness/
Mentoring
Making the most of the smaller scale 
and connected networks in Greater 
Christchurch to test innovative new 
initiatives alongside key stakeholders 
and the wider social enterprise sector. 
Such initiatives could involve investigating 
opportunities for Greater Christchurch local 
government to develop supportive policy 
alongside the social enterprise sector.

Lead
Chief  
Resilience 
Officer

Partners
Akina Foundation 
Rata Foundation 
Business  
community
Community 
sector
Councils

PROGRAMME 8.  Protect and Enhance the Vitality of Our Natural Environment
Community 
8A
groups
Soil and Health 
Association

Ōtākaro Orchard
Development of a prime site within the 
heart of Christchurch’s Central City as an 
edible orchard

Canterbury  
Food 
Resilience 
Network

Committed 
1-3 years

Grants and support
A range of organisations will continue to 
review funding, access to land and other 
needs associated with the establishment of 
community gardens.

Canterbury  
Food 
Resilience 
Network

Soil and Health 
Association 
EnviroSchools

In progress 
and  
Ongoing

Status/
Timeframe Related programmes
To develop 
0-2 years

1  Create Adaptable Places
2  Improve the Quality, 

Choice and Affordability 
of Housing

5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

6  Connect Internationally

1  Connect people 
2  Create adaptable places
5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

1  Connect people 
2  Create adaptable places
5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

1  Connect people 
2  Create adaptable places
5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

11 Securing our future in 
Eastern Christchurch

CCC
Community 
groups

In progress/ 
to develop 
Ongoing 
and 2-10 
years

Ngāi Tahu
Avon Ōtākaro 
Network
Ōpāwaho 
Heathcote 
River  
Network

Community 
groups
UDS natural 
environment 
group

Councils
Ngāi Tahu
Dept. of  
Conservation 
(DOC)
Volunteers

To develop  
1-2 years

2  Create adaptable places
4  Build Participation and 
Trust in Decision-Making

5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

Councils/
Ecological 
Partnership

Community 
Groups
Ngāi Tahu 
Dept. of  
Conservation 
(DOC)
Private  
landowners
Volunteers

To develop 
1-2 Years

1  Connect people 
2  Create adaptable places
5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

8A

8A

8B

8B

Mahinga Kai Network 
The showcased exemplar project is a first 
step in a wider restoration of the Avon 
River/Ōtākaro, Heathcote River/Ōpāwaho 
and the Avon Heathcote Estuary/Ihutai as 
naturally productive environments. Through 
collaborative community engagement 
successive projects will restore habitats, 
develop knowledge and build education 
resources to sustain these restored 
resources.
Develop a Local Biodiversity Partnership
To ensure collective efforts of the wide 
spectrum of community environmental 
activists are better co-ordinated. This 
network will seek to bring together 
all interest groups to provide a new 
platform for supporting the wide range 
of projects that take place across Greater 
Christchurch.
Determine Priority Issues/Sites
Using the strategic content of existing 
Biodiversity Strategies, identify priority 
sites and/or issues around which work 
programmes and partnerships with private 
landowners can be framed.

UNDERSTAND GOAL
We understand our risks to be better prepared for future challenges.

Action Project or Initiative 
Partners
PROGRAMME 9. Improve community understanding and acceptance of risk
9A

Lead

Status/
Timeframe Related programmes

Committed 
and 
Ongoing

4  Build Participation and 

Trust in Decision-Making 

10 Manage the risks we 

face

Government 
departments and 
agencies

Canterbury 
Natural 
Hazard Risk 
Reduction 
Group

Government engagement 
Hazards and other urban development 
management issues relevant in Greater 
Christchurch are present in many other 
parts of New Zealand. The full engagement 
of government is essential to co-ordinated 
approaches around
-  Risk literacy, risk management and risk 

transfer

-  Legislative and national policy directions 
-  Central government funding for projects. 
Work with Central Government should 
involve Greater Christchurch being a test 
bed to develop and trial national policy 
standards.
Consolidated hazard and risk data source
Develop and provide open access to a 
single source of high-quality hazard and risk 
information whose language is accessible 
to the public and technical experts, 
including insurers. Shared understanding 
and language are essential building blocks 
in allowing people and organisations to 
understand, accept and mitigate against 
risks. Will include consistent data-gathering 
standards and processes, definitions, 
language and clear associated public 
information.
Regional Risk Forum
Establishing a Regional Risk Forum to 
develop a co-ordinated regional approach 
to risk will enable Canterbury to take the 
lead in developing a co-ordinated regional 
approach to risk and resilience, which may 
also be leveraged at the national level.
Embed risk literacy in Asset Management 
Programmes 
Christchurch City Council currently has 
a project to capture all the information 
on Council assets, including underground 
infrastructure assets. This project will 
include an asset register, a spatial view 
of all the assets, and information on the 
condition and criticality to improve the 
quality of asset management programming 
through improved risk literacy. This can be 
expanded to other Councils and business in 
Greater Christchurch.

9A

9A

9A

Canterbury 
Natural 
Hazard Risk 
Reduction 
Group

Insurers
Technical 
advisors
Councils
Government 
agencies
The wider 
community

To develop 
1-2 years

2  Create adaptable places
4  Build Participation and 
Trust in Decision-Making

10 Manage the risks we 

face

Canterbury 
Natural 
Hazard Risk 
Reduction 
Group

Councils
Government

Committed 
To develop 
1-2 years

2  Create adaptable places
4  Build Participation and 

Trust in Decision-Making 

10 Manage the risks we 

face

CCC
WDC
SDC

Councils
Government

To develop 
1-2 years

4  Build Participation and 
Trust in Decision-Making

10 Manage the risks we 

face

111

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesPartners

Lead
Canterbury 
Natural 
Hazard Risk 
Reduction 
Group

Status/
Timeframe Related programmes
To develop 
1-2 years

4  Build Participation and 
Trust in Decision-Making

10 Manage the risks we 

face

Chief 
Resilience 
Officer

Canterbury 
Lifelines Utilities 
Group (CLUG)

To develop  
1-3 Years

To be 
determined

Councils

SCIRT

To develop  
1-3 Years

To develop 
1-2 Years

2  Create adaptable places
4  Build Participation and 
Trust in Decision-Making

9  Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

2  Create adaptable places
9  Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

2  Create adaptable places
9  Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

UNDERSTAND GOAL continued

Action Project or Initiative 
9B

Risk literacy programme 
A media and information campaign to help 
people understand the language of risk 
and the main issues that communities will 
have to grapple with. Will need to identify 
people with key skills in the risk and public 
engagement areas and establishing a 
working party to develop a programme. 
This programme could leverage existing 
community-based initiatives including Safer 
Christchurch and Healthy Christchurch, use 
best practice examples from around the 
country.

PROGRAMME 10. Manage the risks we face
10A

Research on risk reduction measures
Exploring and reporting on relevant risk 
reduction tools and projects across New 
Zealand and the wider world (including the 
100RC Network) to leverage lessons learnt 
to inform next generation projects.

Explore cost benefit analysis on 
options to reduce or mitigate risks of 
high frequency events from damaging 
buildings

Explore alternative risk transfer 
arrangements
Explore alternative risk transfer 
arrangements, such as catastrophe bonds 
and parametric insurance, to raise capital 
for specific risk reduction works and/or to 
simplify claim handling. 

Continued funding and implementation 
of projects that reduce natural disaster 
risk and hence improve the risk profile and 
insurability of community assets is essential. 
The efficacy of raising capital for such 
projects through resilience or catastrophe 
bonds could be explored.
Resilience scorecard for regeneration 
projects
Develop a resilience scorecard which can be 
used in the procurement of infrastructure 
projects and other development activities.

10A

10B

10B

10B

Councils

Technical 
advisors

To develop 
1-2 Years

Health Impact Assessments
Health Impact Assessments can be used to 
inform and then refine projects to reduce 
and minimise potential health impacts of 
proposals.

CDHB

Councils
Government 
agencies

Committed/ 
In Progress

2  Create adaptable places
4  Build Participation and 
Trust in Decision-Making

9  Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

2  Create adaptable places
9  Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

10 Manage the risks we 

face

UNDERSTAND GOAL continued

Action Project or Initiative 
10B

10B

10C

10C

10D

Encourage small and medium-sized 
business enterprises (SME) to consider 
insurance as part of risk management
The University of Canterbury has 
undertaken research on how SMEs best 
utilised insurance to get themselves back 
up and running following the Canterbury 
earthquakes. This was an important factor 
in the resilience of the Canterbury economy, 
and also provided employment continuity 
throughout the CES. This initiative would 
encourage SMEs to understand the role of 
insurance in risk management. 
Improved understanding of insurance 
The Canterbury earthquakes highlighted 
that it is important that the community and 
business understands the role of insurance, 
what it covers and what it does not cover.
Facilitate and encourage community 
resilience plans
Community emergency response plans 
focus on building community from regular 
day-to-day use of community groups (e.g., 
the Lyttelton Community Emergency 
Response). Develop (where lacking) 
community emergency response plans.

Risk planning for non-profit 
organisations 
Investigate the extent to which non-profit 
organisations have planned for risk, both 
for continued service delivery and for their 
own continuity and sustainability, and what 
support may be required in the event of a 
disaster.
Christchurch City will join the UN 
Compact of Mayors
Joining the UN Compact of Mayors will 
require measuring and public reporting, 
target setting, and action planning/
continual improvement for greenhouse gas 
emission reduction.

Projects and initiatives under this 
programme will be developed as 
different agencies determine priorities 
for eastern parts of the city in 
consultation with the community. 
The Residential Red Zone and New 
Brighton areas may to be the subject of 
Regeneration Plans although the mandate 
given to Regenerate Christchurch (the 
statutory Development Agency formed 
in 2016) allows for interventions in other 
locations which may be warranted in 
helping transform the area.

Lead
To be 
determined

Partners
UC
CDC
ICNZ

Status/
Timeframe Related programmes
To develop 
1-3 Years

1  Connect people
9  Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

Canterbury 
Natural 
Hazard Risk 
Reduction 
Group
CCC
SDC
WDC

Canterbury 
Natural 
Hazard Risk 
Reduction 
Group

CCC

ICNZ

To develop 
1-3 Years

Community 
boards
Community 
Groups

In progress/ 
Committed 
Ongoing

ICNZ

To develop 
1-3 Years

1  Connect people
9  Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

1  Connect people
2  Create Adaptable Places 
5  Support Community 

Organisations and 
Leaders

9  Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

9  Improve community 
understanding and 
acceptance of risk

CCC, University 
of Canterbury
Insurance 
Council New 
Zealand (ICNZ)
EQC
ECAN
Ngāi Tahu
Canterbury 
CDEM
WDC
Community 
organisations

Committed 
and 
Ongoing

2  Create adaptable places 
6  Connect Internationally
8  Sustain the vitality of 

the natural environment

All Programmes

Will 
commence 
2017

113

PROGRAMME 11. Secure our Future in the Eastern Parts of Christchurch
—

To be 
confirmed

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities100 RESILIENT CITIES

SAM KERNAGHAN 
Associate Director, City Relationships
NICOLA THOMSON 
Associate Director, City Relationships
BRYNA LIPPER 
Senior Vice President, City and Practice Management
LAUREN SORKIN 
Platform Director
MAX YOUNG 
Vice President, Global Communications and Marketing
PAUL NELSON  
Network and Learning Director

RESILIENCE ADVISORY GROUP 

 

 

 

DR JOHN VARGO (Chair) 
 
Co-leader, Resilient Organisations
ROGER FAIRCLOUGH 
 
Consultant
JO HORROCKS 
Principal Advisor Emergency Management, 
Ministry of Civil Defence & Emergency Management
KEN STRONGMAN 
Emeritus Professor of Psychology, Canterbury University
BRUCE GLAVOVIC 
Professor, School of People, Environment and Planning,  
Massey University
NICOLA WOODWARD 
Chief Executive Officer, Aviva
PENNY PRESCOTT   
Coordinator, Canterbury Youth Workers Collective
EVAN SMITH 
Co-Chair, Avon-Otakaro Network
DIANE TURNER 
Principal Advisor, Te Rūnanga o Ngāi Tahu
CHRISSIE WILLIAMS  
Principal Strategy Advisor, Environment Canterbury

 

 

 

COLIN MEURK 
Ecologist, Landcare Research / Creative City Network

 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

It takes  
a village!

The Greater Christchurch Resilience Plan  
was made possible by the generous support of 
100 Resilient Cities pioneered by the Rockefeller 
Foundation.

The plan is the result of the collective efforts of 
many people including the collaboration of all 
Greater Christchurch strategic partners including the Canterbury 
District Health Board. 

We would like to thank the following Chief Resilience Officers whose 
support and inspiration was significant: Toby Kent (Melbourne), Beck 
Dawson (Sydney), Patrick Otellini (San Francisco), Mike Mendonca 
(Wellington) and Joseph Runzo (Toyama).

Doctor John Vargo (Co-leader of Resilient Organisations) as Chair  
of the Resilience Advisory Group has provided outstanding 
leadership and commitment to not only this programme but also to 
the wider national discussion on resilience.

The contribution and support from the Canterbury District Health 
Board and in particular Evon Currie, General Manager Community 
and Public Health was enormous, as was the contribution from 
the New Zealand Transport Agency, Canterbury Civil Defence and 
Emergency Management, Canterbury Development Corporation,  
the Earthquake Commission and Tonkin and Taylor.

Many other people have given generously of their time to take 
part in workshops, meetings, focus groups, surveys and day to day 
discussions. We hope that you will continue to be involved as we 
implement our first actions and we work together to create the next 
generation of resilience actions that will build our resilience over the 
coming decades.

Our strategy partner AECOM made a significant contribution 
and in particular Will Symons from the Melbourne office, whose 
mentorship, guidance and support was invaluable.

We would like to acknowledge the following people and the role 
they played in producing our very first Resilient Greater Christchurch 
Plan. This plan is truly the result of their hard work, dedication  
and insight.  

CHRISTCHURCH CITY COUNCIL RESILIENCE PROJECT TEAM

DEBBIE HOGAN 
Senior Policy Planner, Christchurch City Council
JOHN MEEKER 
Principal Advisor Urban Regeneration, Christchurch City Council
NICK LOVETT 
Policy Planner – Transport, Christchurch City Council
ANGELA CASSIDY 
Principal Advisor Policy, Christchurch City Council
SUE ELLIOTT 
Graphic Designer, Christchurch City Council
JEN KENIX 
Graphic Designer, Christchurch City Council

URBAN DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY PARTNERS 
WORKING GROUP 

KEY CONTRIBUTORS 

 

 

 

EVON CURRIE 
Canterbury District Health Board
RICHARD OSBORNE  
Planning and Strategy Manager, Christchurch City Council
CRAIG MALLETT and ANDREW HAMMOND 
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
DON CHITTOCK 
Environment Canterbury
JON RICHARDS 
Principal Planning Advisor, New Zealand Transport Agency 
JESSE BURGESS 
Planning and Strategy Manager,  Selwyn District Council 
DIANNE TURNER 
Te Rūnanga o Ngai Tahu
KEITH TALLENTIRE   
UDS Implementation Manager
SIMON MARKHAM 
Manager Policy & Customer Service, Waimakariri District Council

 

 

 

 

FOCUS AREA WORKING GROUPS 

Participative Leadership and Governance 
Gary Watson 
Alicia Palmer 
Chris Jansen 
Susan Vallance 
Tessa Sturley 
Penny Prescott 

Christchurch City Council
CDEM
Leadership Lab
Lincoln University
Waimakariri District Council
Youth Workers Collective

Securing a Prosperous Future
Anna Elphick 
Tom McBrearty  

Nick Brunsdon 
Huia Lambie 

Canterbury Development Corporation 
Economic Development Manager 
Enterprise North Canterbury
Canterbury Development Corporation
Canterbury Development Corporation

Understanding and Responding to Future Challenges
Jon Richards 
Jessica Petersen 

New Zealand Transport Agency
Canterbury Civil Defence Emergency 
Management 
Monique Eade 
Environment Canterbury
David Culverhouse  Environment Canterbury
Sharon Torstonson  Social Equity and Wellbeing Network 

Peter Kingsbury  
Alison O’Connell  

[SEWN]
Christchurch City Council 
Board of EQC

Connected Neighbourhoods and Communities
Sandy Brinsdon 
Nicole Randall  
Nicola Ogden 
Moira Underdown  Ministry of Social Development

Canterbury District Health Board
Christchurch City Council
Selwyn District Council

AECOM
AECOM

Mark Gordon 
George Jasonsmith 
Dr Margaret Leaonard  ARA Institute of Canterbury
Eve Lafferty 
Leanne Curtis 
Tom Hooper 
Steven Perdia 
Nick Bryant 
Kelvin Davidson 
Alistair Humphrey 
Anna Stevenson 
Steve Clarke 
Denise Kidd 
Paul Davey 
Jane Morgan 
Rob Lawrence 
Michael Flatman 
Christine Hayden 
Lynette Ebborn 
Shane Murdoch 
Claire Bryant 
Leanne Keenan 
John Moore 
Robert Meek 
Tony Moore 
Chris Gregory 
Tamara McKerman 
Clive Appleton 
Keith Tallentire 
Paul Cottam 
Matthew Dempsey 
John Mackie 
Gavin Till 
George Elder 
Graham Harrington 
Helen Beaumont 
Raf Manji 
Claire Piper 
Nigel Grant 
Claire Phillips 
Rhys Boswell 
Neville Reilly 
Chris Hawker 
Tim Taylor 
Marion Gadsby 
Don Chittock 
Katherine Trought 
Peter Beck 
Te Marino Lenihan 
Suzanne Vallance 
Pauline Saunders 
Jenny Dickinson 
John O’Donnell 
Sara Epperson  
Matt Thomas 
Maggie Tai Rakena 
Susan Krumdiek 
Bronwyn Hayward 
Jason Pemberton 

Barnardos
CANCERN
Canterbury Development Corporation
Canterbury Development Corporation
Canterbury Development Corporation
Canterbury Development Corporation
Canterbury District Health Board
Canterbury District Health Board
Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority
Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority
Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority
Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority
Canterbury Employers’ Chamber of Commerce
Canterbury Tourism
Careers NZ
Child Youth and family
Cholmondeley Children’s Centre
Christchurch City Council 
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch City Council 
Christchurch City Council 
Christchurch City Council 
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch City Council 
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch City Council Environmental Compliance
Christchurch City Council Strengthening Communities
Christchurch International Airport Limited
Civil Defence EM
Emergency Management Otago
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority
Environment Canterbury
Environment Canterbury
Environment Canterbury
Governance Group Chair
K4 Cultural Landscape Consultants Ltd.
Lincoln University
Ministry of Social Development
New Zealand Transport Association
Orion
Problem Gambling Foundation
Sensing City Trust
START
University of Canterbury
University of Canterbury
YouThink

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

115

ABBREVIATIONS

GLOSSARY

CCC 

CCHL 

CDC 

Christchurch City Council

Christchurch City Holdings 
Limited

Canterbury Development 
Corporation

CDEM   Civil Defence Emergency 

Management

CDHB 

Canterbury District Health Board

CERA 

CIAL 

Canterbury Earthquake Recovery 
Authority

Christchurch International 
Airport Ltd.

CRO 

Chief Resilience Officer

DPMC 

EECA 

EQC  

ICNZ 

MBIE 

Department of the Prime 
Minister and Cabinet

Energy Efficiency and 
Conservation Authority

Earthquake Commission

Insurance Council of New 
Zealand

Ministry for Business Innovation 
and Employment

MPI 

Ministry for Primary Industries

NZTA 

New Zealand Transport Agency

SCIRT 

Stronger Christchurch 
Infrastructure Rebuild Team

SDC  

Selwyn District Council

TRONT  Te Rūnunga o Ngāi Tahu

UC 

UDS 

 University of Canterbury

Urban Development Strategy

WDC  Waimakariri District Council

‘We’
Throughout this plan the term ‘we’ is used 
widely and is intended to be inclusive. The 
section ‘what does it mean to be resilient 
in Greater Christchurch’ highlights that we 
all have a role to plan in resilience-building. 
As the plan becomes more detailed within 
the programmes the ‘we’ becomes more 
specific as different actors are assigned. 

Ōpāwaho River 
A spring-fed river that runs through the 
southern parts of Christchurch City, also 
known as the Heathcote River. 

Ōtākaro River 
A spring-fed river that runs through the 
central business district of Christchurch 
City, also known as the Avon River. 

Central Government  
Her Majesty’s government and associated 
agencies.

 

Otāutahi 
The Māori name for Christchurch (originally 
adopted in the 1930s).

Community groups   
Group formed, made up of and run 
by people in the community, whether 
geographically orientated or interest-
orientated.

Councils  
A collective term for Christchurch 
City Council, Selwyn District Council, 
Waimakariri District Council and the 
Canterbury Regional Council.

Government agencies 
Agencies delegated to by government to 
administer services or functions. It includes 
ministries, state-owned enterprises, 
commissions. 

Hapū 
Genealogical decedents or sub-tribes. 

Iwi 
Wider tribe or collection of hapū.

Local authority 
A territorial authority or regional council.

Mahinga Kai 
Food and other resources, and the areas 
which they sourced from. Also the work 
(mahi), methods and cultural activities 
involved in getting foods and resources. 

pā harakeke 
Distinctive Flax plant, used for weaving and 
also representative of Whānau connection. 

Papatipu Rūnanga 
The representative bodies of Ngāi Tahu 
whānui. The representative bodies within 
the Greater Christchurch area include the 
following: Te Ngāi Tūāhuriri Rūnanga, Te 
Hapū o Ngāti Wheke (Rāpaki ) Rūnanga, 
Te Rūnanga o Koukourārata, Wairewa 
Rūnanga, Te Taumutu Rūnanga and Ōnuku 
Rūnanga. 

Raupō 
Native reeds commonly found in swamps 
and near rivers.

Resource Management Act 
New Zealand legislation that governs the 
use of land and resources. 

Tangata whenua 
People of the land: the iwi or hapū who 
hold manawhenua over that area. 

Te Rūnanga o Ngāi Tahu 
Statutorily recognised as the representative 
tribal body of Ngāi Tahu whānui and was 
established as a body corporate on 20 April 
1996 under section 6 of Te Runanga o Ngāi 
Tahu Act.

Marae 
A Marae is a sacred meeting place home to 
those who whakapapa to that area. It is a 
place of refuge. 

Territorial authority 
A city council or district council. This is the 
second tier of local government in New 
Zealand below regional councils.

Mana Whenua 
Hapū, those who have traditional/
customary authrority or title over land and 
the rights of ownership and control of use 
on the land, forests, rivers etc. Also the land 
area (and boundaries – rohe) within which 
such authority is held. 

Ngāi Tahu 
The iwi of Ngāi Tahu, consisting of the 
collective individuals who descend from the 
the primary hapū of Waitaha, Ngāti Mamoe 
and Ngāi Tahu, namely, Ngāti Kurī, Ngāti 
Irakehu, Kati Hurirapa, Ngāi Tūāhuriri and 
Kai Te Ruahikihiki. 

Tikanga 
Culture, custom, ethics, the correct or right 
way of doing things.

Whakatauākī 
Proverb or saying. 

Whānau 
Immediate and extended family. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY

The content of this plan was founded on 4 in depth Focus Area 
Reports produced in March 2016. These can be accessed from the 
website shown on the back cover.  

FOCUS AREA REPORT 1
Participative Leadership And Governance:  
How Can We Build Community Leadership And More  
Participatory Forms Of Decision-Making? (March 2016)
Authors/Working Group  
Alicia Palmer (Canterbury Civil Defence & Emergency Management) 
Gary Watson (Christchurch City Council) 
Chris Jansen (Leadership Lab) 
Suzanne Vallance (Lincoln University) 
Tessa Sturley (Waimakariri District Council) 
Penny Prescott (Youth Workers Collective) 

All Right?. (2015). A Summary of All Right? Research Findings. 
Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (2015) Canterbury 
Wellbeing Index June 2015
Canterbury Mental Health Directory (2015/16) Christchurch: Mental 
Health Education and Resource Centre. 
Carlton, Sally, and Suzanne Vallance (2013) An Inventory of 
Community-led and Nongovernmental Organisations and Initiatives 
in Post-earthquake Canterbury. 
CINCH – Community Information Christchurch. Christchurch City 
Libraries, Christchurch City Council, www.cinch.org.nz 
Community Connect (2007) (July 17). Community and Government 
Working Together – Revised Menu of Options. Portland, Oregon: 
Office of Neighbourhood Involvement.
Cox, Mark, Stokes, Fiona, and Dixon, Hugh. (2015) Giving New 
Zealand: Philanthropic Funding 2014. Rep. Philanthropy New 
Zealand.
Raven Marie. (2013). Ongoing Community Resilience from the 
Ground Up: A Relational Place Based Approach to Grassroots 
Community Resilience. Thesis: Environmental Studies at Victoria 
University of Wellington. 
Department of Internal Affairs (2002) A framework for Developing 
Sustainable Communities. Discussion Paper. 
Department of Internal Affairs (2011) Some International Approaches 
to Community Grant Funding.
Epperson, S (2014) NGO Accommodation Survey: Preliminary 
Analysis. 
Gist, Richard, Lubin, Bernard, and Redburn, Bradley G. (1999) 
Psychological, ecological, and community perspective on disaster 
response.
Haslam, Tom. (2013) You’re the Voice. AuditBlog. Office of the 
Auditor General.
Hutton, David (2001). Psychosocial Aspects of Disaster Recovery: 
Integrating Communities into Disaster Planning and Policy Making. 
Paper no. 2. Toronto: Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction.
McNaughton, Elizabeth (2013) Leadership, Wisdom, and the Post-
Disaster Recovery Process. A report submitted to the Winston 
Churchill Memorial Trust and New Zealand Red Cross. 

Ministry of Civil Defence & Emergency Management (CDEM) 
(2012) Community Resilience: Case Studies from the Canterbury 
Earthquakes. Tephra, Volume 23. 
Nelson, M., Ehrenfeucht, R, Laska, S. (2007) Planning, plans, and 
people: Professional expertise, local knowledge, and governmental 
action in post-hurricane Katrina New Orleans. 
NGO and Community Organisation Updater. NGO and Community 
Organisation Updater. www.ngoupdater.org.nz 
Nielsen Research (2014) Quality of Life Survey 2014: Christchurch 
City. 
Nowland-Foreman, Garth (2011) 28 July. Glimpses of a better world: 
The role of tangata whenua, community & voluntary sector in the 
Canterbury earthquake recovery authority. Our Future Community 
and Voluntary Sector Forum, hosted by Council of Social Services 
Christchurch and Te Runaka ki Otautahi Kai Tahu. St Albans Baptist 
Church, Christchurch, New Zealand. Address.
Ozanne, Lucie L., and Ozanne, Julie L. (2013) Developing Local 
Partners in Emergency Planning and Management: Lyttelton Time 
Bank as a builder and Mobiliser of Resources during the Canterbury 
Earthquakes. University of Canterbury and Virginia Tech. 
Paton, D., Mamula-Seadon, L., and K.L. Selway. (2013) Community 
Resilience in Christchurch: Adaptive Responses and Capacities during 
Earthquake Recovery. GNS Science Report 2013/37, 24.
Non Profit Organisations Network Directory.” Rebuild Christchurch. 
www.rebuildchristchurch.co.nz/networks/directory/non-profit-
organisations 
Salzer, Mark, and Binkman, Leonard. (1999) The short- and long-term 
psychological impact of disasters: Implications for mental health 
intervention and policy.
Thornley, Louise, et al. (2013). Building Community Resilience: 
Learning from the Canterbury Earthquakes. Final Report to 
the Health Research Council and Canterbury Medical Research 
Foundation. 

FOCUS AREA REPORT 2
Securing a Prosperous Future (March 2016)
Authors/Working Group 
Anna Elphick (Canterbury Development Corporation) 
Tom McBrearty (Enterprise North Canterbury)

Canterbury Development Corporation. (2015) AGEING POPULATION: 
Identifying the risks and opportunities of an ageing population in 
Christchurch and Canterbury. 

Canterbury Innovation Ecosystem (2015) www.cdc.org.nz/portfolio-
item/greater-christchurch-innovation-ecosystem/ 

Canterbury Development Corporation Quarterly Monitoring www.
cdc.org.nz/portfolio-item/quarterly-monitoring-reports/

Costa, Hélio Lemes; Torkomian, Ana Lúcia Vitale (2015) The valley 
of electronics: Relations between the creation of a school and the 
building of a successful industrial cluster in Brazil. www.kpmg.com/
uk/magnetcities

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy Communities

117

BIBLIOGRAPHY continued

European Commission (2016) Employment and social developments 
in Europe 2015. Directorate-General for Employment, Social Affairs 
and Inclusion Directorate. 

Doussard, Marc. (2015) Equity planning outside city hall: rescaling ad-
vocacy to confront the sources of urban problems. Journal of Planning 
Education and Research Vol. 35 Issue 3 September 2015 pages 296-
306.

Gabriel Makhlouf (2015) Productivity: Innovation, Diffusion and 
Markets. Delivered by at Productivity Hub Symposium. December 
2015.Greater Christchurch Urban Development Strategy (2016) 
Economic Development Background Topic Paper 

Hayter, Christopher; Link, Albert. (2015) On the economic impact of 
university proof of concept centres . The Journal of Technology Trans-
fer, Vol. 40 Issue: Number 1 p178-183.

MBIE (2014) New Zealand Sectors Report

MBIE (2014) Business Growth Agenda http://www.mbie.govt.nz/
info-services/business/business-growth-agenda/towards-2025 

New Zealand Government (2015) Government position statement on 
social enterprise 

Saunders C., Dalziel L, Hayes P. (2007). The Contribution of Antarctic 
Related Activities to the Canterbury and New Zealand Economies.

Statistics New Zealand. (2015) Exports of services by service type 
(Years ended 2012–15).

Susskind, R. and Susskind, D. (2015) The Future of the Professions-
How Technology Will Transform the Work of Human Experts. 

World Economic Forum (2015) Intelligent Assets: Unlocking the 
Circular Economy Potential. International Journal of Technology 
Management & Sustainable Development. Jun2015, Vol. 14 Issue 2, 
p125-139. 

World Economic Forum (2016) Skills and Workforce Strategy for the 
Fourth Industrial Revolution World Economic Forum. 

 

FOCUS AREA REPORT 3
Understanding and responding to future challenges  
(March 2016)
Authors/Working Group 
Jessica Petersen  
(Canterbury Civil Defence & Emergency Management) 
Jon Richards (NZTA) 
Sharon Torstonson (SEWN) 
Peter Kingsbury (Christchurch CC) 
David Culverhouse and Monique Eade (ECan) 
Alison O’Connell (Insurance Consultant) 

Christchurch Engineering Lifelines Group (1997) Risks and Realities: 
A multi-disciplinary approach to the vulnerability of lifelines to 
natural hazards. http://ir.canterbury.ac.nz/handle/10092/11544
Canterbury Civil Defence Emergency Management (2014) Group 
Plan 

Enfocus (2014) Managing natural hazard risk in New Zealand – 
towards more resilient communities A think piece for local and 
central government and others with a role in managing natural 
hazards (for LGNZ and Regional Councils)
GNS Science/Bay of Plenty Regional Council (2012) I can live with 
this. Public engagement on acceptable risk. 
Insurance Council New Zealand (2014) Action Required to Protect 
New Zealand from Natural Hazards Impact 
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, EQC and BRANZ. 
(2015) Applying lessons from Canterbury to improve management 
of risks from natural hazards. Built Environment Leaders’ Forum, Te 
Papa, Wellington, 10 – 11 September 2015.
New Zealand Civil Defence Emergency Management (2015) National 
Emergency Management Plan
Rebound (2015) Leveraging Catastrophe Bonds as a mechanism for 
Resilient Infrastructure Project Finance” Insuring for Resilience with 
Swiss Re, Goldman Sachs, RMS and refocus partners. April, 2015
Saunders, W.S.A.; Forsyth, P.J.; Johnston, D.M.; Becker, J.S. (2007) 
Strengthening linkages between land-use planning and emergency 
management in New Zealand. Australian journal of emergency mgmt 
22(1): 36-43
Urbis (2015) A Third Way: A proposal for Cyclone Mitigation 
Assistance. (for Insurance Council Australia)

FOCUS AREA REPORT 4
Connected Neighbourhoods And Communities.  
What More Should We Be Doing To Ensure Communities  
Are Healthy, Affordable, And Safe? (March 2016)
Authors/Working Group 
Sandy Brinsdon (Canterbury District Health Board) 
Nicola Ogden (Selwyn DC) 
Moira Underdown (Ministry of Social Development) 
Nicole Randall (Christchurch CC) 
Ann Brown (Canterbury University – student)

Aldrich and Meyer (2015) Social Capital and Community Resilience. 
www.daldrich.weebly.com/uploads/1/5/5/0/15507740/aldrich_
american_behavioral_scientist_2014.pdf 
Bierre, Sarah, Howden-Chapman, Philippa and Lisa Early (2013) 
Homes People Can Afford: How to Improve Housing in New Zealand. 
Published in association with the NZ Centre for Sustainable Cities 
and He Kainga Oranga/Housing and Health Research Programme.
Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (2015) Canterbury 
Wellbeing Index. Available: http://cera.govt.nz/sites/default/files/
common/canterbury-wellbeing-index-june-2015-sec14-social-
connectedness.pdf
Christchurch City Council (2012) Best Practice 
Guidelines for Engaging with Culturally and Linguistically 
Diverse (CALD) Communities in Times of Disaster. 
http://resources.ccc.govt.nz/files/civildefence/
BestPracticeGuidelinesofDiverseCommunitiesDisasterMarch2012.
pdf
Fried, Marc. (1982) Residential Attachment: Sources of Residential 
and Community Satisfaction. Journal of Social Issues, 38, 107-119.

BIBLIOGRAPHY continued

Healthy Christchurch (2012) Christchurch City Health Profile. http://
www.healthychristchurch.org.nz/media/27507/socialconnectedness.
pdf 
Human Rights Commission (2012). A Fair Go for All? Addressing 
Structural Discrimination in Public Services. pp 44-50. www.hrc.
co.nz/files/2914/2409/4608/HRC-Structural-Report_final_webV1.
pdf 
Martin, Atyia. (2015) A Framework to Understand the Relationship 
Between Social Factors that Reduce Resilience in Cities: Application 
to the City of Boston. From the International Journal of Disaster 
Risk Reduction, Volume 12, pages 53-80. www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2212420914001198 
Ministry of Social Development (2015) Household Incomes in New 
Zealand: Trends in Indicators of Inequality and Hardship 1982 to 
2014.
Montgomery, J. (2013). ‘Foreign Workers Flock to Christchurch 
Rebuild’ www.critic.co.nz/news/article/3152/foreign-workers-flock-
to-christchurch-rebuild 
New Zealand Human Rights Commission (2014) Right to Housing 
www.hrc.co.nz/files/1214/2681/4255/Right_to_Housing_Flyer_
FINAL__2.pdf 
Nielsen Research (2014) Quality of Life Survey 2014. www.
qualityoflifeproject.govt.nz/pdfs/Quality_of_Life_2014.pdf 
Public Health Association of NZ (2013) A Resource for Local 
Elections: Housing and Health www.pha.org.nz/documents/Housing-
and-Health-Resource-2013.pdf 
Royal Society of New Zealand (2014) Our Futures Te Pae Tāwhiti. 
The 2013 Census and New Zealand’s Changing Population. 
Statistics NZ. (2014) 2013 Census – Spotlight on Greater 
Christchurch.http://www.stats.govt.nz/Census/2013-census/profile-
and-summary-reports/2013-census-infographic-chch.aspx 

OTHER SOURCES

Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (2014) Community 
in Mind http://www.cph.co.nz/wp-content/uploads/
communityinmindstrategy.pdf 
Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (2013) Land Use 
Recovery Plan http://ceraarchive.dpmc.govt.nz/sites/default/files/
Documents/land-use-recovery-plan.pdf
Canterbury Mayoral Forum (2015) Canterbury Regional Economic 
Development Strategy. www.ecan.govt.nz/publications/General/
CREDS-2015-08.pdf 
 Christchurch City Council (1990) Christchurch Chronology A history 
of settlement.
Christchurch Engineering Lifelines Group (1997) Risks and Realities: 
A multi-disciplinary approach to the vulnerability of lifelines to 
natural hazards. www.canterbury.ac.nz/handle/10092/11544 
Civil Defence and Emergency Management Canterbury (2014) 
Canterbury CDEM Group Plan http://www.cdemcanterbury.govt.nz/
media/34987/canterbury-cdem-group-plan-2014.pdf 

Environment Canterbury (2013) Natural Environment Recovery 
Programme for Greater Christchurch. www.ecan.govt.nz/
publications/General/nerp.pdf 
Greater Christchurch Urban Development Strategy Partnership 
(2007) Greater Christchurch Urban Development Strategy http://
www.greaterchristchurch.org.nz/ 
Greater Christchurch Urban Development Strategy Partnership 
(2016) Greater Christchurch Urban Development Strategy Update 
http://www.greaterchristchurch.org.nz/
Healthy Christchurch Partnership (2010/2012) Christchurch City 
Health and Wellbeing Profile. www.healthychristchurch.org.nz/
media/44655/chch_city_health_profile_2012.pdf 
Johnson, L. and Olshansky, R. (2010) Clear as Mud: Planning for the 
rebuilding of New Orleans.
Jollie, E. (1850) Plot of Christchurch 
Livingston and Associates (2013) Greater Christchurch Housing 
Market Assessment http://www.greaterchristchurch.org.nz/assets/
Documents/greaterchristchurch/Final-GreaterChristchurchHousing
MarketAssessment-20130817.pdf
Ministry of Culture and Heritage (2014) Perspectives http://www.
mch.govt.nz/perspectives/earthquakes/ 
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research Ltd (NIWA) 
(2011) Modelling Coastal Inundation in Canterbury from a South 
American Tsunami http://ecan.govt.nz/publications/Plans/
modelling-coastal-inundation-canterbury-south-american-tsunami.
pdf 
New Zealand Department of Internal Affairs (2002) A framework for 
Developing Sustainable Communities. Discussion Paper. 
New Zealand Government (1998) Ngai Tahu Claims Settlement Act. 
www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/1998/0097/latest/DLM429090.
html?search=qs_act%40bill%40regulation%40deemedreg_
ngai+tahu_resel_25_h&p=1 
New Zealand Treasury (2015) New Zealand’s Future Natural Disaster 
Insurance scheme: Proposed changes to the Earthquake Commission 
Act 1993 http://www.treasury.govt.nz/publications/reviews-
consultation/eqc/pdfs/eqc-rev-discussion-doc.pdf 
Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment (2015) Preparing 
New Zealand for Rising Seas: Certainty and Uncertainty http://www.
pce.parliament.nz/media/1390/preparing-nz-for-rising-seas-web-
small.pdf 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2016) Bulletin Vol. 79(3) February 
2016. Canterbury Rebuild five years on from the Christchurch 
Earthquake. http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/ReserveBank/Files/
Publications/Bulletins/2016/2016feb79-3.pdf 
Rodin, J. (2014) The Resilience Dividend: Being Strong in a World 
Where Things Go Wrong. 
Thomas, J. & Thomas Cass (1847) Christchurch Survey Maps 
Statistics New Zealand (2013-2016) Various demographic tables 
informing the Christchurch Context Map.
 Waitangi Tribunal (1991) The Ngai Tahu Report: Vol. 1. Wellington: 
Booker and Friend 1991 Vol. 1 pp. 242-243

119

Toitū te marae o Tāne, Toitū te marae o Tangaroa, Toitū te iwi   Healthy Land, Healthy Water, Healthy CommunitiesPHOTO CREDITS

Cover  
p2  
p3  
p4  
p8-9  
p13  
p14  
p15  
p20  
p31  
p42-43  
p56-57  
p66-67  
p80-81  
p96-97  
p100  

New Brighton Beach, © Pam Carmichael Photography
Satellite image of Canterbury, © Norman Kuring, NASA Earth Observatory
Mayors, © CCC. All rights reserved.
Sumner to city, © CCC. All rights reserved.
Flax plants, © Lakeview Images
Port Hills to the sea, © Tobin Akehurst
Land Drainage Plan, © UDS
1874 grid map, © Image from Christchurch City Libraries. CCLMaps 227628
Christchurch International Airport, © Waynne Williams, Port Hills Productions
100 Resilient Cities map, © 100 Resilient Cities
Flax weaving, deanmackenzie.com © CCC. All rights reserved. 
Tree planting, © Trees for Canterbury
Aerial of Lyttelton Port, © David Wall/Alamy Stock Photo
Aerial of Christchurch shoreline, Kirk Hargreaves © CCC. All rights reserved.
Children in river, © Waimakariri District Council
Share an Idea event, © CCC. All rights reserved.

The following images are courtesy of CERA:
p44 
p58 
p68 
p82 

River performance, stroll through laneway, shared streets
Young gardeners, library tech assistance
Rebuild worker, retail therapy, section of Te Papa Ōtākaro/Avon River Precinct
Vespa Bar in Poplar Lane, demolition in progress, Fitzgerald Avenue road 
damage, Worcester Boulevard conversation

The following images are courtesy of Christchurch International Airport:
p44 
p58 

River performance, stroll through laneway, shared streets
Young gardeners, library tech assistance

PIONEERED  BY THE
ROCKEFELLER FOUNDATION

100

Resilient@greaterchristchurch.org.nz

greaterchristchurch.org.nz

@resilientGC

