OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW

A City Strategy

TABLE OF CONTENTS

LETTER FROM COUNCIL LEADER, FRANK McAVEETY
LETTER FROM GLASGOW CHIEF RESILIENCE OFFICER, ALASTAIR BROWN  
LETTER FROM 100RC PRESIDENT, MICHAEL BERKOWITZ

1 

INTRODUCTION
What is City Resilience?
100 Resilient Cities - Pioneered by The Rockerfeller Foundation (100RC)
Our Resilience Strategy

2  GLASGOW, A CITY OF RESILIENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

3  OUR RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Our Resilient Glasgow Vision
Strategic Context
Assessment of Resilience Activity
Listening to Glaswegians

4  GLASGOW'S STRATEGIC PILLARS, GOALS AND ACTIONS

Pillar 1  Empower Glaswegians
Pillar 2  Unlock Place-Based Solutions
Pillar 3 
Pillar 4  Foster Civic Participation

Innovate to Support Fair Economic Growth

5  DELIVERING THE STRATEGY

6  MONITORING PROGRESS

•  Appendix1: Summary of Resilient Glasgow Goals and Actions
•  Appendix2: Acknowledgements

3

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYLETTER FROM COUNCIL LEADER
FRANK McAVEETY

Glasgow is a city which learns from its past and builds on its strengths. Our 
people are the backbone of our city and have always shown a willingness to 
adapt, change and reinvent during our long and rich history.

As leader of the city, I am proud to present Glasgow’s first resilience strategy. 

This document shows us how we can adapt and grow no matter what challenges 

the future holds. 

Glasgow has weathered so much change throughout our history from the 

Councillor Frank McAveety

industrial revolution and the decline of our traditional industries to the recent 

Leader of Glasgow City Council

economic downturn. However we have always shown a flexibility and strength of 

character which has allowed us to capitalise on new opportunities for growth.

Glasgow is already a resilient city but it is in our nature to want to do more. That’s 

what this strategy is all about.

It is a distinct feature of the Glaswegian spirit that we always look first at tackling 

inequalities and ensuring that our least well off communities are at the heart of all 

our thinking. I want our city to be a fairer, more just place where resilience grows 

from strong communities.

This strategy has been informed by an intensive and innovative process of 

community engagement. Our resilience conversation has linked to more than 3,500 

local residents across all age groups and communities to ensure that this strategy 

draws on a diverse range of voices. I want our people and the institutions which 

serve them to continue the conversation. 

Glaswegians love to debate and dispute and that is the foundation of a strong 

city democracy. We are also a friendly, neighbourly and tolerant people and 

these features too are the very basis of our resilient city. That’s why we can face an 

uncertain future with confidence.

4

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYLETTER FROM CHIEF RESILIENCE OFFICER
ALASTAIR BROWN

Glasgow was proudly named as one of the first members of 100 Resilient 
Cities – pioneered by The Rockefeller Foundation (100RC) - in December 
2013.  Our membership of the network represents a major step towards 
creating a strategic, multi-disciplinary approach to proactively managing the 
shocks and stresses the city may face.

This strategy is a roadmap towards greater resilience. It focuses on the continued 

transformation of Glasgow. Our ambition is for fair economic growth and a stronger 

Alastair Brown

city. We have become aware from our citywide discussions that resilience emerges 

Glasgow Chief Resilience Officer

from a range of inputs. This Strategy has a key role itself in helping to connect 

those inputs and to ensure our city considers resilience as an explicit and intended 

product of our work.

Whilst the strategy vision is directed to the long-term future, the actions detailed 

in it have an initial two year timeframe for delivery. Thereafter, this action plan will 

be subject to a refresh ensuring that a clear focus on action is maintained and a 

continuing dialogue with residents is created.

Our Resilient Glasgow Strategy has been shaped through engagement with the 

people of Glasgow including residents, businesses, voluntary organisations and 

public sector partners. 

As Chief Resilience Officer, I will continue to work with city partners and 

communities to develop strong collaborative capacity to push forward the delivery 

and implementation of this Strategy.

I give special thanks to all of our partners for their hard work and dedication in 

making this Strategy possible. My gratitude extends to the team at 100 Resilient 

Cities (100RC) for their energy and commitment and the 100RC Strategy Partner 

Arup for their instrumental guidance and support.

Above all, my thanks go out to you, the people of Glasgow for sharing your 

aspirations and ideas for a stronger and more resilient future. Your confidence and 

enthusiasm has been an inspiration to me throughout this process.

5

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYLETTER FROM 100RC PRESIDENT
MICHAEL BERKOWITZ

100 Resilient Cities is honoured to partner with the great city of Glasgow 
in their effort to pioneer solutions and develop an actionable roadmap to 
resilience building. Embedding resilience in the fabric of a city’s planning 
and policymaking can create a thriving city in good times and bad, and yield 
dividends that will make a city stronger for years to come. 

First and foremost, this would not have happened without the vision and passion 

of Council Leader Cllr. Frank McAveety, Alastair Brown, the Chief Resilience Officer, 

Michael Berkowitz

100RC President

and his extraordinary support team, who have gone above and beyond the call of 

duty to produce this visionary document. A highly engaged steering committee, 

the members of five diligent working groups, and Arup were instrumental in 

guiding and informing this process.

Glasgow’s rich history, architecture, and culture are a testament to its resilience. 

The city has met many of the challenges of transitioning from an industrial to 

post-industrial city with innovation and creativity.  During their resilience strategy 

process, the “Glasgow Game” showcased an extraordinarily robust and diverse 

approach to engaging stakeholders around a variety of future scenarios that are 

relevant for Glasgow.  This is crucial. Today’s challenges may not be the same 

tomorrow. Building lasting urban resilience requires recognizing the interplay 

of a city’s strengths, weaknesses, shocks, and stresses. It is about bolstering the 

foundation of a city so that it can respond to new, unforeseen events. It is also about 

making decisions under circumstances where institutional and individual financial 

resources are limited. 

100 Resilient Cities is committed to working with Glasgow in the coming years. 

We bring with us a powerful cadre of public, private, and academic sector partners 

–  the “100RC Platform” – that are also committed to this partnership. Unlocking this 

support and signalling a growing marketplace that is interested in working with 

cities that incorporate resilience thinking into their planning process is a key tenet 

of the 100RC philosophy. We are excited to work with Glasgow at the forefront of a 

new global movement to build urban resilience. And cities and nations near and far 

are taking note of these ground breaking achievements!

6

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY1
INTRODUCTION

WHAT IS CITY RESILIENCE?
100 Resilient Cities describe urban resilience as the capacity of individuals, communities, 
institutions, businesses, and systems within a city to survive, adapt, and grow no matter 
what kinds of chronic stresses and acute shocks they experience. Resilience is about 
building a stronger and more adaptable future for all Glaswegians.
Our understanding of city resilience is informed by the City Resilience Framework, which 

7

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYhighlights the key indicators that any resilient city should aim to fulfil. This tool, designed by 
Arup with support from The Rockefeller Foundation, is a framework through which Glasgow 
will continue to assess the connections between our resilience challenges, review areas of 
weakness, and recognise opportunities to build on our many strengths.

  THE CITY RESILIENCE AGENDA ADRESSES:

• The acute shocks that any city can suddenly 

find itself facing, which are usually 
addressed through the emergency planning 
process.

• Longer-term chronic stresses and strains, 

which are experienced day to day over 
periods of years and decades. 

We integrate both types of challenges through this strategy, particularly building on Glasgow’s 
existing strong approach to emergency planning and response within a broader agenda of 
resilience to daily stresses.  
Further, we recognise the following qualities as being an integral part of Glasgow’s story. 
We will continue to integrate these qualities into our day to day business so that we not only 
maintain essential functions in the face of acute shocks and chronic stresses, but also grow 
and thrive through them.

8

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYGlasgow is Reflective

We learn and grow from our past experiences,

recognising uncertainty and change.

Glasgow is Robust

Our city is well conceived and constructed.

Our physical assets are well managed.

Glasgow is Efficient

The systems in Glasgow are efficient and can handle anticipated levels of 

demand and distribution.

Glasgow is Flexible

Glasgow can change and develop, responding

dynamically to shifting conditions.

Glasgow is Resourceful

We achieve our goals by exploring new processes and methods, drawing 

on our built and natural assets and the expertise of our people.

Glasgow is Inclusive

Glasgow is a city that welcomes all people and ensures equal opportunities 

for people and places to thrive.

Glasgow is Integrated

We strive to meet common goals through

coordinated efforts across all sectors.

WHAT IS 100 RESILIENT CITIES?

The Rockefeller Foundation marked its centennial in 2013 by inviting bids from cities 
around the world to be part of a network of 100 Resilient Cities (100resilientcities.org). 
Glasgow submitted an application for membership of the network in October 2013.

Cities were asked to present a clear and compelling description of how they are 
approaching and planning for long-term resilience. Glasgow chose to focus the application 
on climate change resilience. This especially relates to increased rainfall and flooding, which 
are predicted local outcomes of global warming for the city-region. The existing work of the 
Climate Ready Clyde was central to our application.

Glasgow was amongst 400 cities whose bids were assessed by a panel of internationally 
respected judges. They included former presidents Bill Clinton and Olosegun Obasanjo 
of Nigeria. The bid was successful and Glasgow’s status in the first tranche of 32 cities was 
announced in December 2013. Now, there are 100 cities in the global network – the last 37 
cities were announced in May 2016.

This award has allowed Glasgow to appoint a Chief Resilience Officer, Alastair Brown, to 
lead the development of a resilience agenda for our city. It has provided benefits from 
engaging with peer cities from around the world. It has provided additional resource 
including the services of Arup as a Strategy Partner to assist Glasgow in developing this 
Resilience Strategy and access to further support from a number of global service providers 
– Platform Partners – who can help us with implementing our resilience actions.

10

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY100 RESILIENT CITIES

GLASGOW

11

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYOUR RESILIENCE STRATEGY

This Resilience Strategy is the main output of our work with 100RC to date, and the starting 
point for a holistic programme of resilience action. Development of the Strategy has been 
led by Glasgow City Council and partners, however, it belongs to the City of Glasgow and 
we hope that you will all play a part in moving us collectively towards a more resilient future.
This Strategy has emerged from an extensive programme of work including research and 
analysis of the actions already underway throughout the city that contribute to resilience. 
This has been considered alongside in-depth consultation with Glaswegians and advice 
provided by expert stakeholders through regular Steering Group and Working Group 
meetings. This approach has given us the opportunity to identify where there may be gaps 
in our existing approach and opportunities to build on the great work we are already doing. 
Our membership of a global network of cities has given us the opportunity to think about 
our future and how we can plan ahead with a global approach. Whilst adaptation to climate 
change remains a principal focus of Glasgow’s approach, this peer network allows us to 
share experience about the challenges of planning for a variety of chronic stresses and 
acute shocks in urban life. As a result, the scope of our Resilience Strategy has broadened. 
The future is always uncertain, but there are things we can do now and actions we can set in 
motion which can help us to be more resilient in the face of the challenges which that future 
will undoubtedly bring. This Strategy commits us to addressing challenges proactively, 
starting today.

Our Resilient Glasgow Strategy is structured around four ‘strategic pillars’ and fifteen 
‘goals’, which set out the long-term trajectory for Glasgow’s resilience. Within this, we 
have identified forty-nine actions that will be implemented during the next two years. 
After this time, our action plan will be reviewed and refreshed.

12

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYThis timeline illustrates the key 
milestones in our journey with 
100 Resilient Cities.

2
GLASGOW, A CITY OF RESILIENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

Glasgow has an extraordinarily rich history characterised by unshakeable strength and 
continuous reinvention in the face of shocks and stresses. We can learn the lessons of our 
city’s past to teach us how we can make a better future. 

Glasgow is an incredibly old site of human settlement. The remains of canoes from Stone 
Age times have been found, for example, by the banks of the Clyde. In one of our main 
parks an Iron Age camp has been excavated. And in the churchyard of Govan Old there is 
evidence of Christian burials dating back to the 5th Century, indicating that it is one of the 
very earliest places of Christian worship in Scotland.

The city is known globally as one of the great powerhouses of the Industrial Revolution. In 
2015 we commemorated the 250th anniversary of James Watt conceiving of the separate 
condenser to the steam engine as he walked on Glasgow Green. This was perhaps the 
single most significant act in powering the Industrial Revolution. The ripples from Glasgow’s 
transformation lapped the shores of the whole world: Glasgow made history on a grand 
scale. By the late 19th century Glasgow was an industrial powerhouse known as the Second 

GOVAN OLD PARISH CHURCH

14

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYCity of the British Empire. It built a quarter of all locomotives in use anywhere in the world 
and a similar proportion of global shipping. Many of the city’s architectural masterpieces, 
such as the City Chambers on George Square, date back to this period of economic 
prestige.

BROOMIELAW

Yet it is in the last two centuries that Glasgow has seen more change than in all its long 
previous history. It was one of the first cities in the world to experience the profound 
shocks of modernity as the Industrial Revolution led to its rapid expansion and a swelling 
population. Life expectancy for Glaswegians in the 1850s was just over 25 years. 

The city entered the 20th century as one of the most densely populated in Europe, with 
a population peaking at 1.1 million. 200,000 of its citizens served in the First World War, 
with many thousands being killed or returning to Glasgow with physical and psychological 
injuries. 

The city played a major role in the Second World War too. However, Glasgow experienced 
the twin shocks of very rapid de-industrialisation and population loss in the years that 
followed. Traditional industries were lost and unemployment rose. 

15

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYBy the late 1940s and early 1950s, many families moved out of the crowded city to live in 
nearby new towns. Those who were left were often housed in groups of high rise flats that 
quickly lost their initial attraction and became associated with urban blight and crime. The 
city’s population dramatically reduced to half its previous level by the 1990s. 

As a result, Glasgow’s people have experienced chronic levels of stress which have 
produced profound disparities in income, health and opportunity. The most recent profile of 
our population’s wellbeing shows the extent of the impact of the chronic stresses. Glasgow 
continues to have the poorest life expectancy in Scotland for both men and women, rich and 
poor. These are some of the issues to which our resilience strategy is very much directed. 

FORMER GRAVING DOCKS

For some cities, a narrative of managed economic decline would have ensued from such 
stress. Not for Glasgow. The city took steps to diversify its economy and build a more 
attractive place for families. At the centre of this approach were the city’s world class 
museums and galleries, together with one of the most vibrant artistic and cultural sectors 
anywhere in Europe. Glasgow has highlighted its architectural assets, promoted its sporting 
credentials, and drawn on its strong further and higher education sector. Above all, the city 
has always regarded its communities as its most important asset and in 2013 adopted a new 
brand to reflect this: People Make Glasgow. 

The city’s economy has developed and changed, from a carbon-intensive manufacturing 
base in the 19th century to a modern city focused on a low-carbon future. Population loss 

16

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYhas been halted and the city’s population is now expected to grow by 15% by 2037. This is 
in no small part due to Glasgow being an attractive place in which people choose to make 
their lives. As a result, Glasgow is the most ethnically diverse city in Scotland.

RIVERSIDE MUSEUM

17

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYThe city was tested once again in the recession brought about by the financial collapses of 
2007/08, which it has weathered with significantly lower losses in production and economic 
activity than in previous downturns. 

In 2014, the city was the proud host of the Commonwealth Games and, along with other 
major events that year, Glasgow was seen on television by one third of the entire world 
population. 

During our conversations with Glaswegians on what makes Glasgow a resilient city we found 
that they like to talk of their ‘bounceback-ability’ factor – an ability to cope and even thrive 
through hard times. Our history of resilience and transformation is testament to that. This is 
why People Make Glasgow Resilient.

As the biggest city in Scotland, Glasgow is the economic engine and main commercial 
hub not only for the region but the country as a whole. With almost half of population of 
the entire country entire living within an hour of the city, the resilience of our institutions, 
economy, people and infrastructure is not only of local importance. Our resilience plays a 
crucial role regionally as well as nationally.

18

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYGLASGOW IS A RESILIENT CITY WITH:

The most diverse population in 
Scotland with 1 in 7 Glaswegians 
coming from an ethnic minority 

The largest student population in 
Scotland with 5 degree awarding 
institutions and 3 super colleges. We 

background.

educate over 130,000 students each year.

We have over 3,500 hectares of 
green space and 91 public parks.

17 billion GVA generated to the 

Scottish economy each year.

Employment levels are currently growing 

at 3.4% a year.

19

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYOUR MAJOR RESILIENCE CHALLENGES INCLUDE:

A population that is expected to grow 
rapidly by 15% over the next 20 years.

58% of residents live within 500m of 

vacant and derelict land.

13% of adults hold no formal 

A violent crime rate that is twice the 

qualification.

national average.

36% of households experience fuel 

poverty, a growing trend.

20

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYThe ordinary people 
of Glasgow showed 
admirable courage 
and compassion. 
Their first instinct 
when tragedy struck 
was to run towards 
danger to help those 

in peril.

Lord Provost Sadie Docherty

RESILIENCE IN ACTION
Addressing shocks through integrated emergency 
response in Glasgow

Long before Glasgow started working with 100RC, we have had a successful Resilience 
Unit within the City Council which coordinates city-wide emergency planning and 
response. Glasgow prides itself on having strong partnerships and mechanisms for 
responding to emergency incidents - including fire, flooding, explosions, travel accidents, 
chemical spills and dangerous buildings. This formal emergency management is supported 
by a strong sense of grassroots resilience, which is being strengthened through community 
resilience planning.

The events of one particular Friday night in November 2013 severely tested resilience in 
Glasgow. Ten people were killed when a Police Scotland helicopter crashed into a crowded 
city centre bar, a tragedy that created an overwhelming sense of shock and loss. 

Our emergency services played the critical role of responding to the immediate shock, 
as well as supporting the long-term recovery of those affected by the incident. This 
demonstrated the trust Glaswegians have for emergency services and the importance of 
integrated planning for this type of emergency.

The people of Glasgow demonstrated remarkable levels of resilience. Glasgow’s Lord 
Provost Sadie Docherty commented that “the ordinary people of Glasgow showed 
admirable courage and compassion. Their first instinct when tragedy struck was to run 
towards danger to help those in peril”. In the months and years that have followed the event, 
Glaswegians have come together to pay their collective respects to those who have lost 
loved ones and to mark the city’s sense of a shared tragedy.  A public appeal fund raised 
almost £500,000 in support of those affected by the tragedy.

22

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYOUR VISION

Glasgow is a thriving, 
inclusive and resilient 

city. We celebrate 

innovation, production 
and culture. Our future 
city is a fair society, 

where all Glaswegians can 
enjoy the best possible 

health and well-being, and 
have the opportunities they 
need for our city to flourish.

3
OUR RESILIENCE STRATEGY

This strategy brings together aspects of Glasgow City Council’s Strategic Plan, the Glasgow 
Community Planning Partnership’s Single Outcome Agreement, the Poverty Leadership Panel’s 
strategy to tackle poverty, and Glasgow’s proposed City Development Plan. By aligning 
our strategic pillars to this policy context, we ensure the Resilience Strategy is integrated 
into an existing framework and adds value to the city. The following diagram visualises the 
relationship between Glasgow’s strategic objectives and our four pillars of resilience.

24

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYL
A
N
O
I
T
A
N

L
A
N
O
G
E
R

I

L
A
C
O
L

The objectives of a broad range of city wide strategies, initiatives and actions are crucial for 
the development of our urban resilience. Our strategic pillars and indeed the city vision, 
have been designed to pull existing initiatives together so that these work together in a 
whole-systems approach.
The image below shows some of the partnerships and strategies that have been recognised 
as playing a crucial role on our journey to greater resilience. These were identified by our 
city partners during early preliminary resilience assessment activity. It is by no means an 
exhaustive list.

Ready Scotland

Community Empowerment

(Scotland) Act 2015

National Strategies

Curriculum for Excellence

City Deal

Metropolitan Glasgow Strategic

Drainage partnership

Glasgow Clyde Valley Green

Network Partnership

Local Resilience Partnership

Climate Ready Cycle

Glasgow and Clyde Valley

Strategic Development Planning

Strategic
Council
Plan

Poverty
Leadership

Panel

Glasgow
Economic
Leadership

Glasgow
Housing
Strategy

Single
Outcome
Agreement

Smart City
Agenda and

Open
Glasgow

Community

Risk

Register

Glasgow strategic

Volunteering
Framework

Group

Transforming 

Glasgow

Digital
Glasgow

Community
Learning and 
Development

Plan

Healthy

Sustainable

Me

Healthy

Sustainable 

Neighbourhoods

Open
Space
Strategy

Energy and
Carbon

Master Plan

Independent

Living
Strategy

Development

Local

Plan

Glasgow
Economic
Strategy

Sustainable
Glasgow
Board

Strategic
Asset

Management

Plan

W
O
G
S
A
L
G
T
N
E
I
L
I
S
E
R

 

25

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYBy working with our city partners, we will take a whole-systems approach that embeds long-
term resilience thinking into existing national, regional and local strategies and initiatives. 
This will reinforce structural connections and delivery mechanisms between this strategy 
and the initiatives being delivered elsewhere in the city, meaning that our overall approach 
to resilience building activity is strengthened. This will also help us to monitor and track the 
delivery of this strategy.
This is an agile strategy. The actions contained within this document are short-term and have 
been developed as iterative interventions that will help us to connect existing strategies and 
initiatives through the application of a resilience lens. 
These actions will be refreshed again in 2018 to ensure the strategy remains current in a city 
that is constantly transforming. All of our goals and actions are summarised in the strategy 
action plan. Some feature goals and actions are explained in full here in this strategy

26

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYASSESSMENT OF RESILIENCE  ACTIVITY

Glasgow’s strategic context is sophisticated and well developed. Partners are 

generally agreed that the city has a good reputation and state of preparedness 

for dealing with sudden shocks, managed through the city’s long-standing 

Resilience Unit and our emergency services. The city maintains a risk register 

for its key assets and regularly engages in emergency planning exercises. 

Attention has therefore focused on the chronic stresses over long time periods 

to which the city and its people have been subject – in particular those relating 

to poverty and inequality - and how best to address these over the coming 

decades. Once we started this conversation and talked more with our partners 

about resilience it became clear that these are the issues which are regarded 

locally as really significant challenges and have naturally emerged as the 

foundation of our strategy.

By further considering how potential shocks and stresses could impact on our 

city, we have been identifying how our existing capacity can be strengthened. 

The examples on the next page highlight just some of the work that is already effecting 
change for people, places, institutions and the economy across the city. In preparing this 
Resilience Strategy, we identified opportunities to build on what we’re already doing and 
set out a strategic direction to address our challenges in the longer term. We evaluated 
these opportunities in terms of the resilience benefits they would bring for Glaswegians in 
addition to the feasibility of implementation. This has allowed us to reach the pillars, goals 
and actions outlined in this strategy.

27

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYCHALLENGE

CHALLENGE

The Roma community from Central, 
Southern and Eastern Europe have 
been immigrating to Glasgow since 
2004. There are now around 3500 
Roma living in the city, particularly in 

the Govanhill area.

EXISTING ACTION

Driven by the severe poverty and social 
exclusion faced by this community, and 

with funding support from the EU, a 

local action plan was developed setting 
out over 50 recommendations in the 
fields of health, housing, education 
and employment to improve the lives 
of Roma in Glasgow. Glasgow is now 
a leader in Roma inclusion policy at a 

Scottish and EU level.

Approximately 60% of our residents 
live within 500m of derelict land. 
This is double the national average. 
Glasgow has more vacant sites than 
the rest of Scotland put together.

EXISTING ACTION

The Stalled Spaces project focuses 
on the temporary use of vacant land, 
under-utilised open space and sites 
earmarked for development. Since 
2011 the project has brought over 22 
hectares of land into temporary uses, 
including green gyms, active play, pop-
up sculptures, outdoor education and 

growing spaces.

28

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYLISTENING TO GLASWEGIANS 
A key aspect of Glasgow’s resilience work has been engagement with a wide range of both 
institutional stakeholders and residents. This has taken place in order to determine what they 
regard as the city’s resilience priorities and to build ownership and commitment towards a 
strategy that addresses them. Workshops have been held and provided with facilitation by 
Glasgow’s Strategy Partner Arup. A Steering Group, chaired by the city’s Chief Resilience 
Officer, has also been established to consider in further detail the materials generated by 
these workshops. 

We engaged in a wide-ranging Resilient Glasgow conversation with local people in the 

summer of 2015.  Activity was promoted through social media and tailored communications 
designed to reach out to specific groups of people.  Collaboration took place with public 
health researchers, council officers, change practitioners, artists and professional facilitators 
in order to foster high levels of participation and active dialogue in the city’s resilience 
conversation.

The engagement process consisted of the following:
• 

Face-to-face conversations - These took place through the use of interactive techniques 
which included street games, participative art and public installations. The Resilient 
Glasgow team visited 15 locations over 25 days, speaking with over 1,500 people.  
People expressed their views by drawing and writing messages on blackboards and 
telling their stories to officers from the Resilient Glasgow team. Over 500 responses 
were received.  
Targeted workshops - 12 workshops were held with nine stakeholder groups, including 
the Glasgow Disability Alliance; West of Scotland Racial Equality Council; Interfaith 
Glasgow; Glasgow Homelessness Network and the City Mission. Workshops were 
facilitated using an exercise called ‘The Glasgow Game’, which uses role play to explore 
the complexities of resilience through different future scenarios. Over 300 participants 
attended.

• 

•  On-line survey - Over 100 members of the public responded to a detailed online survey 
about the draft themes of Glasgow’s initial resilience plans. The survey was designed to 
interrogate the themes and to generate opportunities for new thinking which could be 
incorporated into the next phase of work.  

29

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY•  Children and young people - More than 1,200 children and young people took part in 
an art competition designed to explore the qualities and attributes needed for a more 
resilient future. Young Glaswegians proved to be highly positive and enthusiastic about 
the future of their city.  

A variety of views was expressed across such diverse groups of Glaswegian residents. There 
were, however, some recurring themes. For instance, people value and want to see their 
local environment nurtured and protected. Concerns were raised over weather related 
challenges, linking to the climate change adaptation agenda. Opportunities for more 
healthy and active lifestyles also played a significant part in people’s thinking. There was a 
clear appreciation throughout of the role that stronger communities can play, with people 
across all groups saying that a more resilient future is one in which people help and care for 
vulnerable neighbours.

“We need to know who is most 
at risk if services are impaired 
and have emergency plans that 
can be acted on quickly. We 
need to be well prepared!” 

Participant at West of Scotland Regional Equality Council Glasgow 
Game workshop

30

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY“Get to know yourself.
  We ARE survivors.”

GCVS participant at a Glasgow Game workshop

“We should place a strong 
emphasis on healthy eating, 
outdoor recreation in schools; 
offer free opportunities for 
adults to learn to cook health 
food”

Interfaith Scotland participant at a Glasgow Game workshop

“The more gardens you 
make, the more people 
will join in and meet new 
people.”

Face to face engagement asking the public ‘What will 
make Glasgow stronger?’

31

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY3
GLASGOW’S STRATEGIC PILLARS, GOALS AND ACTIONS

At the foundation of this strategy is a commitment to embedding resilience thinking 
into existing realms of work that support the delivery of our vision. This will mean 
that the policies and plans that have informed the development of this strategy will 
become delivery vehicles that strengthen our approach. 
The diagnostic work undertaken during the development of our Resilience Strategy 
has led to four strategic pillars, which provide the long-term overarching framework 
through which we will deliver our vision for a Resilient Glasgow. Each pillar is defined 
by a number of goals.

32

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYPILLAR 1

WE WILL:

EMPOWER GLASWEGIANS

GOAL A 
GOAL B 

GOAL C 

GOAL D 

Improve equitable access to quality local services that foster wellbeing.
Empower community leaders through cooperation between city partners 
and the third sector.
Use existing assets to create healthy, safe and inclusive spaces for the 
community to network, helping to mitigate social isolation
Influence the Scottish Government agenda on social and community 
resilience.

33

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYPILLAR 2

WE WILL:

UNLOCK PLACE-BASED SOLUTIONS

GOAL A 
GOAL B 
GOAL C 

Create an integrated resilience exemplar in the north of the city.
Tackle the local impacts of global climate change.
Unlock the community, environmental and economic potential of derelict 
and vacant sites in Glasgow.

34

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYPILLAR 3

INNOVATE TO SUPPORT FAIR ECONOMIC GROWTH

WE WILL:

GOAL A 
GOAL B 

GOAL C 

GOAL D 

GOAL E 

Support new urban solutions, business development and new technology ideas.
Through a ‘New Approach to Enterprise’ support new and existing 
businesses to grow.
Initiate a post-industrial city sub-group with our 100RC partners to share 
and learn from best practice.
Tackle poverty, including in-work poverty and In Work Progression, and 
create meaningful work for Glaswegians.
Continue to increase the skill levels of Glasgow’s working age population.

35

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYPILLAR 4

WE WILL:

FOSTER CIVIC PARTICIPATION

GOAL A 

GOAL B 

Build capacity among citizens and decision-makers, enabling them to 
apply resilience thinking to their daily work and lives.
Identify the opportunities for resilience building associated with 
devolution of powers to and from the city council.

36

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYSTRATEGIC PILLAR 1

EMPOWERING GLASWEGIANS

Empower citizens and communities to strengthen 
their personal and collective resilience and work to 
mitigate systematic barriers that undermine it.

Educated and engaged communities 
are an untapped asset for building 
resilience

Participant from the West of Scotland Regional Equalities Council at the Resilient Glasgow Glasgow Game

Glasgow is a diverse city. It is also a city of inequality. We want to create a fairer, more equal 
society that is resilient to a range of potential futures. 
The education of all Glaswegians is central to the development of a resilient city. Learning 
and development empowers the growth of more resilient people, individually and 
collectively. This includes community learning support and interventions as well as the 
education of our children and young people. 
The existing education system is geared towards the delivery of an inclusive and holistic 

37

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYcurriculum that maintains a breadth in the range of subject areas covered, whilst also 
building solid foundations for later specialisation. The principles of personalisation, choice, 
challenge and progression are vital to the development of flexible and capable global 
citizens.
The link between poverty and deprivation and educational attainment is well known. We will 
support our education partners to continue building successful and resilient schools that 
serve the needs of our more deprived communities and work to reduce child poverty and its 
impact on attainment.
It is also our belief that a fairer Glasgow is a city where partners work in collaboration to 
strengthen the entire city. Our aspiration is to have open and transparent relationships 
between communities and the institutions that serve them. Autonomous and resourceful 
communities are crucial for a more resilient city and we want to empower all Glaswegians to 
be able to shape the future of their neighbourhoods. 
We will promote the delivery of innovative initiatives that engage communities with the 
coordination of decisions affect their future. The ability for community groups to participate 
in conversations about how budgets are allocated and resources managed is one that 
requires us to re-examine existing ways of working.  Through the Glasgow Community 
Planning Partnership, and in line with our aspiration to facilitate the growth of cooperative 
businesses and social enterprises, we are reflecting on the relationships we must develop in 
order to build skills and confidence within our communities.  The Community Empowerment 
Act (Scotland) 2015 provides further opportunities for community groups to influence how 
spaces and assets are programmed for public use. We will examine the potential as well as 
the legislative implications for devolving power for communities to utilise and grow their 
existing sources of resilience. 
This strategic pillar also recognises that Glaswegians are our greatest asset when dealing 
with a challenge. The social support provided is unpaid and voluntary, relying on the good 
will of our neighbours and friends. We believe the investment and commitment from 
individuals through formal and informal volunteering is a good mark of urban resilience in 
Glasgow. With this in mind, we will support the delivery of initiatives that help us to broaden 
our volunteering capacity across the entire city. 

38

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYGoal 1.A.  Improve equitable access to quality local services that foster wellbeing.
These include public services such as health and social care, schools, museums, leisure 
centres and libraries, as well as facilities that provide healthy food, banks and affordable 
financial services. This also considers the situation of transport nodes for connecting 
with other parts of the city.

The availability of accessible high quality services can differ greatly between 
neighbourhoods. The barriers to access are complex and are not limited to availability. 
We will equality proof services including disabilities, transport, perceived territorial 
divides, differing levels of education, cultural differences and social inequality.

RESILIENCE VALUE
Glasgow will be a city where all citizens have access to high quality services that foster 
wellbeing.
This will increase the flexibility and adaptability of our local communities and strengthen 
their ability deal with new and existing challenges. It will also promote engaged 
communities and ensure the continuity of critical services.

ACTIONS UNDER THIS GOAL:
1.A.1  Map the availability of important local services in communities throughout the city
1.A.2  Undertake a gap analysis of important local services in communities, taking into 

account physical, cultural and territorial barriers to access.

1.A.3  Facilitate the further implementation and scaling up of Open Glasgow's 

Community Mapping tool, increasing digital skills and levels of community 
empowerment - with particular focus on groups subjected to inequalities.

1.A.4  Facilitate data sharing between public sector agencies and the third sector to 
drive interventions that fill service gaps, assist inter-agency coordination, and 
enhance integrated planning.

1.A.5  Develop an integrated resilience plan for critical services with respect to long-

term stress.

39

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYFEATURED ACTION 1.A.2. Undertake a gap analysis of important local services in 
communities, taking into account physical, cultural and territorial barriers to access.

Description: We will work with businesses and local community groups to map the 
availability of important local services and identify where there may be 
service gaps. Using Geographical Information Systems (GIS) we will work with 
communities to analyse this data against a selection of social indicators to 
determine whether services are being appropriately delivered. This information 
will be made available to our partners, social enterprises and start-ups to assist 
the development of new solutions that target these gaps. 
Timescale: Short Term - 2016 - 2018

Action owner and delivery partners: Glasgow City Council, GCPH, Third Sector Forum, 
GCVS.

“What this means to me”…
Better and more accessible services 
provided close to your home or within your 
community.

40

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYFEATURED ACTION 1.A.5. Develop an integrated resilience plan for critical services in the 
face of long-term stress.

Description: Business continuity plans are designed to ensure services are able to operate 
and recover quickly when they are affected by shocks - such as flooding - and 
stresses - such as increasing demand for services. These plans are typically 
prepared by individual organisations, with only limited consultation and 
coordination between service providers whose operations affect others. To 
ensure improved integration across critical organisations and reduced risk 
of cascading failures from one service to another which could affect people 
and businesses, we will identify the national, regional and local functions that 
are most critical and convene a cross-sector working group to stress test the 
existing business continuity plans and take steps to integrate them, with the 
objective to ensure that critical services remain functional and accessible, 
regardless of future circumstances. 
Timescale: Short Term - 2017 - 2018

Action owner and delivery partners: Glasgow City Council, with NHS Greater Glasgow 
and Clyde, emergency responders, utilities, energy suppliers, transport providers, private 
banks, housing associations, HMRC
Target: 100% coordinated risk mitigation and recovery across critical agencies.

“What this means to me”…
You will have better access to important 
services during periods of severe weather 
or other unusual events, with minimised 
disruption.

41

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYGoal 1.B.  Empower community leaders through cooperation between city 
partners and the third sector.
We recognise that the challenges facing the third sector are greater than ever. 
Decreasing budgets and growing financial pressures are making it increasingly difficult 
for voluntary organisations and social enterprises to secure funding. The resulting 
ways of working are reactive, with work programmes often responding to availability of 
funding.

Playing a crucial role in improving the health and wellbeing of many of our 
Glaswegians, our third sector partners are critical delivery agents in the development 
of local communities. Their own organisational resilience is paramount for a stronger 
future. We will work with the Glasgow Community Planning Partnership, the Third Sector 
Forum and Glasgow Council for the Voluntary Sector to strengthen organisational 
resilience and strengthen effective relationships and communication channels that are 
aligned to a shared vision through the Single Outcome Agreement.

Our third sector partners have the skills, knowledge and commitment to help us unlock 
innovative responses to new and existing challenges. We will work with our third sector 
partners to identify what information is needed to develop local capacity whilst at the 
same time understanding where there are collaborative opportunities for exploring new 
experimental and integrative approaches to developing greater urban resilience. Our 
aim is for communities that are equipped to make the important decisions about what 
affects them most.

We understand that strong empowered community leaders are essential to creating 
a resilient city. We will seek to bolster community empowerment to ensure that a 
clear and consistent communications method is used between Glasgow City Council, 
our public sector partners, the third sector and community groups. This clear line of 
communication will allow information exchange both ways and enable more defined 
long term planning and skills development.

42

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYRESILIENCE VALUE
Glasgow will be a city with strong collaborative capacity for capitalising on opportunities 
to connect new and existing models that support societal resilience. By strengthening our 
shared vision through shared leadership, we will foster stronger community pride, better 
support vulnerable people and improve access to well-paid and rewarding employment. 
This will help us to address the social and material dimensions of poverty and deprivation 
with a long-term reduction in health and economic inequalities and improved integrated 
governance.

ACTIONS UNDER THIS GOAL:
1.B.1  Develop an understanding of what makes a strong community leader using 

information from case studies and university-led research. Use this information 
to develop briefings for third sector support to Glasgow's community leaders 
and community development workers

1.B.2  Commission a study to understand how leadership can be nurtured through 

early years care and teaching. Use this information to develop briefings for care 
providers and schools. This work will explore management styles appropriate to 
early years nurture approaches.

1.B.3  Embed the broader resilience agenda as part of the objectives for the 

forthcoming Glasgow Volunteering Charter 2016-2019

FEATURED ACTION 1.B.1. Develop an understanding of what makes a strong community 
leader using information from case studies and university-led research. Use this information 
to develop briefings for third sector support to Glasgow's community leaders and 
community development workers.

43

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYFEATURED ACTION 1.B.1. Develop an understanding of what makes a strong community 
leader using information from case studies and university-led research. Use this information 
to develop briefings for third sector support to Glasgow's community leaders and 
community development workers.

Description: Local people are experts on what is needed to make their neighbourhoods 

thrive. We want to understand how to engage with people at a neighbourhood 
level to build on positive assets, address inequality and increase opportunity. 
There are a number of high impact initiatives in Glasgow that focus on 
developing community resilience at a local level. We want to understand how 
these pockets of excellent practice can be extended beyond the current reach 
for the benefit of all communities. We will analyse case studies and university-
led research to develop our knowledge in this area. Where we learn from 
this best practice, we will roll this out to develop grassroots leaders who are 
empowered to make important decisions that benefit local communities. We 
will develop briefings for third sector support to Glasgow’s community leaders 
and development workers. Timescale: Short Term - 2016 - 2017

Action owner and delivery partners: Glasgow Community Planning Partnership, The Third 
Sector, Universities, Glasgow City Council. Target: Literature review to be developed and published

“What this means to me”…
Improved support for community 
groups and grassroots leaders, helping 
to stimulate social cohesion, improve 
community participation and develop a 
more transparent relationship with local 
government.

44

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYGROWING THE RESILIENCE OF OUR 
CHILDREN THROUGH INCLUSIVE PLAY

Baltic Street Adventure Playground 
is an exciting and inclusive project 
based in Dalmarnock in the East End 
of Glasgow. Set up in 2013 by the art 
and architecture collective Assemble, 
a previously dilapidated and unsafe 
space was transformed into a dynamic 
and accessible supervised Adventure 
Playground. The project responds to a 
number of local challenges, not only 
around vacant land and lack of play 
space, but also the accessibility of 
affordable child care.

What makes Baltic Street Adventure 
playground particularly special is the 
way in which it has been developed. 
Independently run, children have been 
involved in every step of the way, from 
development of the site to appointment 
of play workers. The direction of the 
project is influenced by the choices and 
preferences of the children themselves. 
Dedicated play workers facilitate the 
personal development of all children, 
supporting them to pursue their own 
activities from make-believe play to 
resourceful construction projects. 

FEATURED ACTION 1.B.3. Embed the broader resilience agenda as part of the objectives 
for the forthcoming Glasgow Volunteering Charter 2016-2019.

Description: Robust volunteering networks leverage social capital and enhance community 

cohesion, both qualities required for societal resilience.
We will apply a resilience lens to the strategic volunteering charter to help 
define how the resilience drivers can be better connected to deliver a more 
impactful approach. The strategic volunteering charter will outline the 
framework by which the city will enhance and support volunteers over the 
coming years.  Particular areas of focus will feature around individuals in 
poverty, those affected by early years’ childcare challenges and young people 
who require support on their path towards full and fulfilling employment jobs 
where pay and conditions can sustain us and our families and enable us to 
build and live our lives. Increasing these levels of ‘work and worth’ will support 
activities that provide intergenerational, communication and confidence 
building skills and other essential skills to support paid employment. The social 
skills earned in this way are widely recognised and the social cohesion that they 
generate across communities and cities must be fully defined to demonstrate 
the importance of volunteering work. 
The charter will specifically outline work of the Strategic Volunteering 
Framework Group, and align with the “Case for Change” national document. 
We need to enhance and support existing multi-agency forums to enrich and 
develop volunteering networks in the city.  This will include encouraging city 
stakeholders and in particular employers to allow their staff time to volunteer. 
This will also seek to address challenges and obstacles to volunteering, 
ensuring work with communities to enhance existing activity.
Timescale: Short Term - 2016

 

 

 

46

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYAction owner and delivery partners: Glaswegians, Volunteer Glasgow, Glasgow City 
Council.
Target: A new Glasgow Volunteering Charter

“What this means to me”…
You will see increased opportunities for 
volunteering in your community.

47

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYLEARNING FROM BRISTOL: PUTTING PEOPLE AT THE HEART OF CITY RESILIENCE

Bristol has put communities at the centre of their resilient building efforts with 100RC, reflecting the city’s 
long-standing commitment to sustainability and community participation. The ‘Make Sunday Special’ 
campaign is one fun and creative way for residents to connect with each other and their city, facilitating 
the development of social capital and community capacity. This campaign has been held on an annual 
basis, bringing arts and cultural events to some of Bristol’s neighbourhoods and the city centre, with the 
aim to inspire families and individuals to interact with their neighbours and participate in new and fun 
events and activities. 

The ‘Community Places of Safety’ is another innovative community-focused scheme that ensures 
residents have somewhere to go for temporary shelter in the case of an emergency. Venues for short-
term evacuation are identified on the basis of disabled access, 24-hour availability, and appropriate 
toilet, heating and refreshment facilities. Places of safety can be identified from a map on the Bristol 
government website, and also display a logo at their entrance. Places of safety are opened for up to 
four hours and managed by Council staff, after which alternative accommodation will be found if it is still 
unsafe to return home.

Lessons learned for Glasgow:
•  We can promote Glasgow’s arts and cultural sector while stimulating community engagement, 
helping to address social isolation and promote a flourishing economic sector simultaneously.

•  We can leverage our existing spaces in the city to provide safe and neutral community places for 

refuge during an emergency.

48

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYGoal 1.C.  Use existing assets to create healthy, safe and inclusive spaces for the 
community to network, helping to mitigate social isolation.

ACTIONS UNDER THIS GOAL:
1.C.1  Review levels of control over existing public assets and patterns of use to 

determine spaces that could be programmed for community use.

1.C.2  Explore the implications of the Community Empowerment Act (Scotland) 2015 

potential to transfer control of public assets to communities.

1.C.3  Work with partners to ensure that community spaces are utilised in a way that 

benefits all community groups.

Goal 1.D.  Influence the Scottish Government agenda on social and community 
resilience.

Expand with narrative. – helping national agenda, benefiting from City Deal, delivering for 
Scotland and UK

ACTIONS UNDER THIS GOAL:
1.D.1  Continue to engage Scottish Government with the Resilient Glasgow initiative 
and conversely attend Scottish Government meetings to collaborate and allow 
knowledge exchange.

49

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYSTRATEGIC PILLAR 2

UNLOCKING PLACE BASED SOLUTIONS

Implement and support place-based solutions 
to improve personal, community and economic 
resilience.

The City Development Plan (CDP) will, once adopted, play a central role in guiding the 
delivery of a place based approach to improving personal, community and economic 
resilience. The LDP has been informed by and aligns with the Strategic Plan objectives and 
promotes a policy framework that gives priority to achieving successful placemaking.  

Placemaking
Central to the implementation of place based solutions is the concept of placemaking. 
Placemaking, or successful placemaking, is underpinned by a design-led approach to 
designing new development that is co-ordinated through the planning process. All aspects 
of successful placemaking, beyond the contribution of new development, require a 
holistic approach that considers the area’s context, and balances the range of interests and 
opportunities to create multiple interconnected benefits through a collaborative process. 
Placemaking involves understanding the elements that contribute to an area, considering 
what is currently successful and what is failing. Placemaking contributes towards the 
creation of successful  and resilient places, based upon balancing the relationship 
between the physical, social and economic characteristics of the area.

50

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYA Resilient Glasgow is a city that has the potential to transform itself. A number of significant 
place-based priorities are helping us along this journey. These include the delivery of 
the £1.13 billion City Deal for Glasgow, the development of the Sighthill Transformation 
Regeneration Area (TRA), the Single Outcome Agreement’s Thriving Places initiative as 
well as other Housing, City Centre and Canal Regenerations. Both programmes will deliver 
massive resilience dividends through the implementation of major infrastructure, innovation 
and labour market projects.
Our approach to improving the critical infrastructure of our city is underpinned by our 
ambition to be the most sustainable city in Europe. Through the implementation of 
place-based solutions, we seek to become more resilient to the changing environmental 
conditions that threaten to undermine our physical and social integrity. In particular, we want 
to achieve:
•  A low carbon footprint and improved air quality
•  Connected transport infrastructure for businesses and communities
•  Accessible, affordable and green ways for communities to move about Glasgow
•  An energy efficient future
• 
•  Good access to physical and digital infrastructure

Investment and jobs within local communities

A CHANGING CLIMATE
One of our greatest environmental threats is human-induced 
climate change and the impact it will have on our city, including 
homes, businesses, infrastructure and communities. The local 
effects of climate change will include increased risk of flooding, 
new patterns of disease and more frequent occurrence of extreme 
weather events

We will build on the success of exemplar partnerships that are already delivering 
programmes and will increase our capacity to cope with climate change. These include the 
Canal Partnership, the Metropolitan Glasgow Strategic Drainage Partnerships (MGSDP), 
Glasgow and Clyde Valley Green Network Partnership (GCVGN) and the Climate Ready 
Clyde initiative. 

51

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYWe focus our attention on bringing together businesses, communities, artists, technical 
experts and academic specialists in a joined up effort to build awareness and facilitate the 
development of an integrated climate change adaptation plan.
We recognise that informed, design above and below ground is essential for resilient 
development particularly as much of the ageing infrastructure/networks are underground. 
This will give us opportunities as well as challenges. Furthermore, this theme also addresses 
issues of public safety and security, by considering how the design of public spaces can 
deter crime and anti-social behaviour, and how emergency services and the community 
sector can help to manage public safety risks in an integrated way.
The implementation of the new CDP is crucial for the continued development of societal 
and economic resilience in Glasgow. Our new plan will provide a concise framework for the 
delivery of sustainable, vibrant and distinctive places that are well-designed, safe, healthy 
and inclusive, contributing towards improving health and wellbeing as well as encouraging 
future investment
To help us deliver on this strategic pillar, we will focus our immediate attention towards the 
development of resilience in the north of the city. We will develop an approach to resilience 
building that then inform similar work with communities in other parts of Glasgow.

Goal 2.A.  Create an integrated resilience exemplar in the north of the city. 
The north of Glasgow has been selected as a ‘test-bed’ for an integrated resilience 
planning approach due to its ‘priority area’ status in the proposed CDP.
The communities in the north of Glasgow are incredibly resilient in the face of a 
number of disproportionate stresses that are closely related to the post-industrial 
legacy of the area. These issues have been compounded by patterns of investment, 
lack of active travel and public transport networks to neighbouring areas, and low 
availability of local employment opportunities. The resulting stresses are associated 
with poverty and deprivation with high proportions of young people not in education 
or employment and significant issues surrounding addictions and mental health.   
The high concentration of vacant and derelict land in the north of Glasgow has 
also become a physical and social barrier to connectivity. It can often result in an 
environment that does not inspire pride in place and demotivates Glaswegians from 

52

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYtaking advantage of active transport networks. There is also a perception that public 
transport availability is limited and does not always serve the needs of communities. 
On the other hand, the future of the north of Glasgow is an exciting one, with a number 
of innovative initiatives currently being delivered. Amongst these include the ambitious 
Sighthill TRA and the Thriving Places initiative, both of which will increase opportunities 
local people and improve quality of life. The area is also home to extensive areas of 
green space and the Forth and Clyde Canal, as well as having significant potential for the 
deployment of new smart solutions to urban challenges including district heating schemes 
and intelligent technology. 
We will work with the communities in the north of Glasgow to connect and build on these 
initiatives and opportunities. By trialling a resilience planning approach in the north, 
we can transfer experiences to other areas of the city, ensuring the delivery of a greater 
resilience dividend for all Glaswegians.

RESILIENCE VALUE
The community, environmental and economic potential of derelict and vacant sites in 
Glasgow will be unlocked. By using 3D modelling to map vacant and derelict land we will be 
able to de-risk development by identifying new opportunities above and below ground. This 
will promote development opportunities associated with sites in order to attract developers 
and promote economic regeneration, compact city development and appropriate services.

ACTIONS UNDER THIS GOAL:
2.A.1  Develop spatial supplementary guidance for North of Glasgow, integrating 

resilience drivers.

2.A.2  Develop the Urban Living Partnership bid jointly with the academic sector, 

integrating resilience as the central approach. Dependant on a successful bid, 
the project will run from 2016 to 2018.

2.A.3  As part of the E COST Sub Urban Action develop UK’s first statutory 

Supplementary Guidance for subsurface planning.  Integrating above and 
beneath the ground data, mapping. guidance & policy.

53

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY2.A.4  Use of the Resilient Europe URBACT III project to focus on Possilpark. Working with 

city partners connecting existing activity at neighbourhood level and exploring 
resilient institutions, place and people with local community groups to develop an 
integrated local action plan.

2.A.5  Delivery of Glasgow’s Open Space strategy and development of local contexts 
that provide scoping and background information for six Strategic Development 
frameworks.

2.A.6  Identify a process whereby resilience can be built into the CDP Action Programme.

FEATURED ACTION 2.A.1. Develop spatial supplementary guidance for North of Glasgow, 
integrating resilience drivers.

Description: We will develop spatial supplementary guidance that integrates the drivers 
and qualities of resilience. This will help us ensure that we consider the long-
term integrity of our city as business as usual. We recognise that one unit of 
planning will reduce response actions by between four and seven units of 
expenditure. Our approach will reduce future requirements to address physical 
vulnerabilities through costly retrospective action. 
This action will increase stakeholder visibility of what is happening in the north 
of Glasgow, enabling the coordination of impactful decision
Timescale: Short Term - 2016 - 2018

 

 

Action owner and delivery partners: Glasgow City Council, Glasgow housing associations, 
Scottish Canals, Glasgow Community Planning Partnership, Glasgow Clyde Valley Green Network 
Partnership, Community Groups

54

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY“What this means to me”…
New developments in your area will be 
assessed through a set of policies that try 
to make the development more flexible 
to accommodate environmental and 
social change where they are needed and 
beneficial.

Creating a more robust, inclusive and integrated city through integrated planning.

In 2007 Glasgow won its bid to host the 2014 Commonwealth Games, and began 7 years of 
planning for the ‘Best Games Ever’. Underpinning the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth Games 
was our ambition to create a more flourishing, active, connected and sustainable Scotland. 
The Games were an opportunity to bring vitality into areas of the city that had suffered most 
during an extended period of deindustrialisation and population decline – in particular the 
East End of the city.

55

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYThe multi-agency partner Clyde Gateway was established to manage the regeneration 
efforts in the East End. Partnering agencies consulted intensively with local communities 
to build on community strengths and maximise social benefits. These regeneration efforts 
included new roads infrastructure, refurbished existing venues and the new Emirates Arena 
and Sir Chris Hoy Velodrome. One of the biggest success stories is the Athletes Village.

Construction work on the Athletes’ village began in June 2011. During the Games, the 
village provided accommodation and facilities for 6,500 competitors and officials. Following 
the Games, the properties were retrofit to transform the village to offer 700 affordable new 
homes, including 400 homes for social rent and a new 120 bed care home for the elderly.

The development is one of the most significant new urban housing developments in the 
UK and was constructed to the highest (BREEAM Excellent) environmental standards. Now 
an exemplar ‘eco-village’, residents benefit from living in flood resilient properties, energy 
efficient properties, a Combined Heat and Power Energy Centre which provides hot water to 
all properties, sustainable and accessible green space and improved transportation links to 
the area.

56

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYFEATURED ACTION 2.A.4. Use of the Resilient Europe URBACT III project to focus on 
Possilpark. Working with city partners connecting existing activity at neighbourhood level 
and exploring resilient institutions, place and people with local community groups to 
develop an integrated local action plan. Featured Action 2.A.4.  Resilient Possilpark. Use of 
the Resilient Europe URBACT III project to focus on Possilpark. Working with city partners 
connecting existing activity at neighbourhood level and exploring resilient institutions, 
place and people with local community groups to develop an integrated local action plan.

Through the ERDF URBACT III Resilient Europe project, we will work with local agencies 
and communities in the Possilpark neighbourhood of Glasgow to develop an integrated 
local action plan for building resilience. We will build on the Thriving Places initiative with 
a particular focus on the environmental, social and economic challenges being faced by 
the local community. We will develop an approach that can then be rolled out to other 
communities and neighbourhoods in Glasgow.
This activity will help us to develop increased collaborative capacity between communities 
and institution. We will want to empower communities through the development of a 
greater understand of local resilience pressures and opportunities.  

Action owner and delivery partners: Glasgow City Council, Glasgow Community Planning 
Partnership, Glasgow Centre for Population Health (GCPH)

Timescale: Short Term - 2016 - 2018

“What this means to me”…
There will be opportunities to get involved 
in the planning and delivery of local 
initiatives that make your neighbourhood 
look and feel better.

57

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYLEARNING FROM MEDELLIN: UNITING COMMUNITIES THROUGH 
STRATEGIC INFRASTRUCTURE INTERVENTIONS.
In the 1990s, at the height of Columbia’s drug wars, Medellín was 
one of the most violent cities in the world. Over the last decade, 
the city has invested in a range of innovative solutions to its 
social challenges. These include the urban Gondola system and 
hillside escalator that have made it possible for sharply divided 
communities to connect with each other and the rest of the city. 
The commute between some of the city’s most desperately poor 
communities and the wealthier city centre once took up to four 
hours. Now it takes less than 60 minutes. Additionally, institutions 
have been placed in the stations and parks that surround them. 
Whilst the challenges of Medellin are not being compared to 
those in Glasgow, we recognise that there is learning that we can 
take from this story.

LESSONS LEARNED FOR GLASGOW:
Our physical infrastructure can be planned to facilitate 
social cohesion, reduce isolation and promote community 
resilience. These impacts should be considered through 
any strategic infrastructure intervention.

58

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYGoal 2.B.  Tackle the local impacts of global climate change.
We are acutely aware of Glasgow’s exposure to future climate change, particularly the 
impacts of increased rainfall and flooding. Partners across the city are already taking 
action to understand and address these risks, but there is more we can do to ensure 
our built and natural environments are prepared for the future, and our people and 
communities are safe from harm.

RESILIENCE VALUE
Glasgow will be more resilient in the face of climate change risks. We will foster long-term 
and integrated planning that empowers communities and promotes local leadership. We 
will take advantage of climate change threat as an opportunity to enhance our natural and 
manmade assets, improving quality of life for all Glaswegians. We will seek opportunities to 
invest in integrated infrastructure projects that increase social justice whilst providing local 
communities with new skills and employment opportunities.

ACTIONS UNDER THIS GOAL:
2.B.1  Learn from other cities in the 100RC global network about urban interventions 

to increase the amenity value of water management solutions.

2.B.2  Prepare guidance on climate ready design and promote adoption by 

developers, planners and designers, particularly focusing on building retrofit to 
ensure long-term fitness for function.

FEATURED ACTION 2.B.1. Learn from other cities in the 100RC global network about 
urban interventions to increase the amenity value of water management solutions.

Description: Sustainable water management solutions – such as open channels, ponds and 
rain gardens for storing and treating surface water - can offer practical benefits 
for reducing flood risk locally and further downstream whilst providing a level 
of water treatment. They also provide as social, economic and environmental 
advantages for communities and people. If managed well, they can be an 

59

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYaesthetic and amenity feature for communities and can improve local property 
values compared with a heavily engineered drainage solution.  This green 
infrastructure is a shift from the drainage infrastructure of the past, which aimed 
to remove water quickly to drains and sewers below ground. There is therefore 
a cultural shift to be achieved to ensure that developers and citizens in Glasgow 
recognise the value of green infrastructure solutions and are able to maximise 
the amenity value of new green and blue spaces in the city.  To find ways for 
Glasgow’s communities to get the most out of the water management solutions 
we are being implemented  throughout the city, Glasgow will engage with the 
wider network of 100RC cities to gather best practice guidance and learning 
from successful existing projects around the world.
Timescale: Short-term 2016

 

Action owner and delivery partners: Glasgow City Council, with Scottish Environmental 
Protection Agency (SEPA) and Metropolitan Glasgow Strategic Drainage Partnership (MGSDP).

“What this means to me”…
Improved green and open spaces for 
recreation, which also help to reduce the 
risk of flood damage to your homes.

60

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYLEARNING FROM ROTTERDAM:
MANGING URBAN WATER RISKS FOR AMENITY VALUE.

Our fellow post-industrial city of Rotterdam has an inspirational 

story of transformation from one of the most severely bombed cities 
of the Second World War, to one of the most innovative cities of the 
future.

The Dutch city is surrounded by water on four sides, with the 
majority of its land mass sitting below sea level. For centuries, 
Rotterdam has used dykes, barriers and canals to protect against 
the challenges associated with flood risk. Today, climate change 
is a growing concern, in particular the threat of heavier and more 
unpredictable rainfall.

The Bethemplein water plaza is an innovative resilience solution 

to the threat of flooding whilst making water storage visible and 
enjoyable for local communities. The plaza provides additional 
water storage in a densely built up area. 90% of the time, this 
sunken plaza serves as a playground and recreation area. In times 
of heavy rainfall, excess surface water is purified and diverted to 
the plaza, creating a dynamic urban pond that stores water until the 
system has enough capacity again

LESSONS LEARNED FOR GLASGOW:
We can mitigate our flood risks working within the 
natural water cycle, while simultaneously creating new 
recreational spaces for our communities and achieving 
urban regeneration objectives.

61

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYFEATURED ACTION 2.B.2. Prepare guidance on climate ready design and promote 
adoption by developers, planners and designers, particularly focusing on building retrofit 
to ensure long-term fitness for function.

Description: As the local climate changes over time, Glasgow’s buildings and infrastructure 

will need to withstand shifting conditions including changes in temperature 
and rainfall, and more extreme weather. As many of the city’s existing buildings 
will still be standing in 30 years and more, they must be able to adapt to 
climate trends and future impacts. A climate ready design guidance scheme 
will help designers and developers to design new buildings and infrastructure 
to respond to anticipated future conditions, and to retrofit existing buildings 
to cope with these changes too. The guidance will particularly take into 
account the heritage buildings that we have throughout Glasgow, which are 
an important part of our local identity and an attraction to visitors, but which 
present particular challenges for future proofing.
Timescale: Short Term - 2018 - 2019

 

Action owner and delivery partners: Glasgow City Council with SEPA, MGSDP, Adaptation 
Scotland. Target: Climate ready design guidance to be applied to all new developments and 
substantial retrofits underway in Glasgow by 2020.

“What this means to me”…
Your homes, schools, hospitals and 
workplaces will be better prepared to 
withstand changing temperatures, severe 
storms and floods.

62

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYUPGRADING OUR DRAINAGE INFRASTRUCTURE TO ACCOMODATE
SEVERE RAINFALL EVENTS

The Metropolitan Glasgow Strategic Drainage Partnership (MGSDP - www.mgsdp.org) is 
collaborative partnership between local authorities, the Scottish Environment Protection 
Agency, Scottish Water, Scottish Enterprise, Clyde Gateway and Scottish Canals. The Vision 
is to transform how the city region thinks about and manages rainfall to end uncontrolled 
flooding and improve water quality. The partnership seeks to upgrade and modernise the 
Glasgow area’s drainage and sewerage network, reducing flooding and improving the 
quality of our river water. The initiative plays an important role in contributing to economic 
development whilst improving our natural environment and integrating investment 
planning.

Since 2002, the MGSDP has developed efficient and robust systems that have helped to:
• 
• 
• 
• 

Significantly reduce the risk and impacts of flooding to over 7,000 properties
Protect hundreds of homes and businesses through various flood prevention schemes
Invest over £150million to reduce the risk and impacts of sewer flooding and improve water quality 
Improve and protect the natural environment of the region

The MGSDP partners will continue to make significant investment in the coming years to 
continue to deliver the Vision through the MGSDP Guiding Principles (following page).

63

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYWATERWAY
RECONNECTIONS

KEEPING
WATER ON THE
SURFACE

BIODIVERSITY
URBAN
ENHANCEMENT

CLIMATE
CHANGE
READY

MGSDP
VISIONS

INTEGRATED
URBAN
DESIGN

BLUE-GREEN
NETWORKS

FOR EXTREME
DESIGN
RAINFALL

SUSTAINABLE
DRAINAGE
SOLUTIONS

Goal 2.C.  Address the disconnect between North Glasgow and the rest of the city by 
developing improved transport links.

ACTIONS UNDER THIS GOAL:
2.C.1  Initiate a conversation between Glasgow City Council and service providers to 

develop and shared understanding of challenges and opportunities.

64

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYSTRATEGIC PILLAR 3

INNOVATING FOR FAIR ECONOMIC GROWTH

Innovate to support fair economic growth that 
creates well-paid, accessible and meaningful 
opportunities for both businesses and 
Glaswegians.

Glasgow has weathered a massive 
economic transition and we must 
make sure we are prepared for future 
challenges

Participant from the West of Scotland Regional Equalities Council at the Resilient Glasgow Glasgow Game

The recession has been one of the most significant stresses to have challenged the 
economy of our city. It has had a real impact on the city, testing the resilience of our people, 
businesses and organisations. Despite facing one of the most serious economic recessions 
of all time, we successfully hosted the ‘Best Games Ever’, the Commonwealth Games 2014. 
Confronting one of the most significant stresses to have challenged our resilience, we 

65

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYembraced an opportunity that would deliver a real economic impact for the city and catalyse 
positive change for the lives of Glaswegians.
A resilient Glasgow confronts adversity to be a city of prosperity that provides a high quality 
of life for all. Our future city is a centre of innovation, production and culture. It is also a city 
that offers Glaswegians a good quality of life. We will support the development of economic 
interventions that enhance the strength of our communities.
Through the Single Outcome Agreement, which maps out our shared priorities for partners 
in the city, we will work with our community planning partners to continue maintain a key 
focus that addresses youth unemployment. We will work with economic development 
structures and our educational systems to ensure that our children and young people 
are sufficiently developed in a way that prepares them with the skills required by our 
communities and businesses. We will support businesses to take advantage of and grow 
from the assets, skills and enthusiasm of our young people.
At the same time, we will support the delivery of digital skills to not only consume services 
but to be the producers of new goods and services, harnessing the potential of digital 
technologies to drive growth, stimulate innovation and improve productivity
Glasgow is the economic centre for Scotland and we want to compete with other cities in 
Scotland and the wider UK. We have a strong and well-developed service based economy 
and we want to further diversify our economic model. We will do this by attracting and 
retaining a diversity of successful business that will secure long-term economic resilience. 
At the same time we will develop the economic resilience of individual new businesses, 
supporting them through the entire business cycle from start-up through to growth and 
maturity.

Goal 3.A.  A resilient economy is one that builds upon the skills, assets, history and 
ambitions found in the city and its people. We will facilitate the development of 
creative and innovative new urban solutions that add value to the physical, social and 
economic fabric of Glasgow. We will work with start-ups, educational institutions, 
creative organisations and our local businesses to develop skills and capacity across all 
sectors of the city in a way that support sustainable development and increases urban 
resilience.

66

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYRESILIENCE VALUE
We believe the personal resilience of Glaswegians is inextricably linked to availability of 
meaningful and fulfilling employment. By supporting initiatives that increase the economic 
growth of Glasgow we will support livelihoods and employment, increase the sense of worth 
within communities. By fostering economic prosperity, we will unlock barriers that prevent 
Glaswegians from finding employment that is personally and socially rewarding.

ACTIONS UNDER THIS GOAL:
3.A.1  Identify and make available spatial data sets needed to help identify and enable 

integrated resilience actions, including data sets that are currently 'closed'.

3.A.2  Facilitate a city wide conversation to better understand the way in which risk 

deter/drives investment and how resilience informs the way in which investors 
and insurance companies are making decisions.

3.A.3  Hold a hackathon/Challenge Lab to support the development of innovative 

urban resilience solutions, business development and new technologies.

3.A.4  Maximise the role of educational institutions in generating ideas to spur new 

economic growth.

3.A.5  Develop a working process with our city partners and educational institutions to 

develop a suite of climate resilient design project proposals. This will increase 
collaborative capacity, ensuring that we are in the best position to bid for 
emerging project funding.

FEATURED ACTION 3.A.1. Identify and make available data sets needed to enable 
resilience actions, including data sets that are currently ‘closed’.

Description: Open data is an enabler for greater resilience. It accelerates innovation between 

community groups, partners and entrepreneurs. This action will allow for the 
coordination of well informed decisions that can facilitate economic growth in 
a way that delivers social and environmental benefits. Building on the success 
of the Future City Glasgow initiative, we will bring together communities and 
businesses with partners who are currently working on the development of 

67

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYsmart, digital interventions. Through increased collaborative capacity, we seek 
to navigate the challenges associated with the opening of data sets within the 
city.
Timescale: Short Term - 2016 - 2017

 

Action owner and delivery partners: Glasgow City Council with University of Glasgow, University 
of Strathclyde, Glasgow Community Planning Partnership, Glasgow Economic Leadership, 
Challenge Lab.

“What this means to me”…
There will be more opportunities for 
rewarding work and leisure in your city.

FEATURED ACTION 3.A.3. Hold a hackathon/Challenge Lab to support the development of 
innovative urban resilience solutions, business development and new technologies.

Description: Over the next two years, Glasgow will hold five challenges for entrepreneurs 
and start-ups, which will equate to 100 days in total. We want to build on our 
reputation as a centre of creativity and innovation, allowing skills and capacity to 
emerge from Glaswegians to define the shape of our future economic activity. 
We will also host a series of youth hackathons that supporting the development 
of our young people and identify new smart solutions that we can use to 
address specific resilience challenges.
Timescale: Short Term - 2016 - 2017

 

68

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYAction owner and delivery partners: Challenge Lab with Glasgow colleges, University of 
Glasgow, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow City Council, Scottish Enterprise, Glasgow Economic 
Leadership, SCDI, Jobs and Business Glasgow.

“What this means to me”…
There will be more opportunities for young 
people, and greater potential to attract and 
retain young entrepreneurs in Glasgow.

Goal 3.B.  Through a ‘New Approach to Enterprise’ support new and existing 
businesses to grow.

ACTIONS UNDER THIS GOAL:
3.B.1  Ensure that the new Economic Strategy contains a strong focus on the delivery 
of 'a more flexible and responsive city resource'. This should be centred around 
a strong business base that is adaptable to changing economic conditions and 
political administration priorities.

3.B.2  Identify how data analytics can be better used to drive efficiency and inform 

policy interventions. Use this evidence to develop a more focussed approach to 
deployment of support and resources.

3.B.3  Identify support interventions for inclusion in the new Economic Strategy. These 

will focus on the development of resilient and sustainable business practices. 
We will support SMEs across the business lifecycle, from start-up through 
growth to maturity.

69

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYGoal 3.C.  Initiate a post-industrial city sub-group with our 100RC partners to share 
and learn from best practice.
Whilst Glasgow has a remarkable story to share, we have a lot to learn from other 
cities. We want to explore how other cities are addressing the legacy of post-
industrialisation to transform into thriving and vibrant places. We will work with 
the cities of Bristol, Boulder, Durban, Huangshi, Melbourne, Pittsburgh, Rotterdam 
and Vejle to share best practice and develop new innovative approaches to local 
challenges.

RESILIENCE VALUE
Glasgow will share lessons and experience that can be used to develop resilience amongst 
partner cities. We will develop an understanding that will inform our approach to the chronic 
stresses that are associated with a post-industrial legacy. We will develop new ways for 
stimulating entrepreneurial activity, approaches to developing circular economy activity and 
different strategies for people centred design. This goal will increase resilience across all of 
the dimensions of the City Resilience Framework.

ACTIONS UNDER THIS GOAL:
3.C.1  Initiate sub-group with 100RC, inviting relevant post-industrial cities to 

participate.

3.C.2  Glasgow to chair first meeting of post-industrial sub-group. Exploration of 
topics including: Macro-economic transition; Business continuity planning 
and emergency response; and Effective models of childcare, elderly care and 
employment.

FEATURED ACTION 3.C.1. Initiate sub-group with 100RC, inviting relevant post-industrial 
cities to participate.

70

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYDescription: We will initiate a sub-group with 100RC, inviting relevant post-industrial cities 

to participate. Glasgow will chair initial meetings. Topics for exploration include 
local economic pressures, business continuity planning, unemployment and 
crime and vandalism. Glasgow will chair the first meeting of the post-industrial 
city sub-group.
Timescale: Short Term - 2016

 

Action owner and delivery partners: Glasgow City Council, 100RC, academic partners.

“What this means to me”…
City services will be improved and new 
economic pathways developed using best 
practices learned from other cities.

INTEGRATED AND RESOURCEFUL LEADERSHIP FOR ROBUST ECONOMIC 
DEVELOPMENT

The Glasgow Economic Leadership (GEL) was established in 2011 to provide independent 
leadership and direction to economic development activity in Glasgow and to champion 
the implementation of the recommendations made by the Glasgow Economic Commission. 
The Group, chaired by Professor Sir Jim McDonald, acts as a senior advisory body to the City 
Council but also to national bodies like Scottish Enterprise and Skills Development Scotland, 
which have investments to make in the growth of the city of Glasgow.

Goal 3.D.  Tackle poverty, including in-work poverty and in-work-progression, preventing 
and mitigating the impacts of poverty for and with Glaswegians.

71

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYACTIONS UNDER THIS GOAL:
3.D.1  Complete a gap analysis of the aspects of ‘Work and Worth’ not currently being 

addressed by Poverty Leadership Panel.

3.D.2  Facilitate discussions with economic partners to ensure societal resilience is an 

explicit and intended outcome of new economic interventions.

3.D.3  Explore opportunities for changes to care models to mitigate impacts based on 

learning around poverty and access to employment.

3.D.4  Embed objectives of socio-economic resilience throughout the forthcoming 

Economic Strategy.

Goal 3.E.  Continue to increase the skill levels of Glasgow’s working age population.

ACTIONS UNDER THIS GOAL:
3.E.1  Identify opportunities for providing employment support to SMEs that assist 

with business growth and increases the prosperity of the Glasgow City 
economy.

3.E.2  Work with the education system and local industry to identify where there are 

new training and learning opportunities for our young people, focusing on 
developing the skills required for a more resilient economy, now and in the 
future.

3.E.3  Deliver a graduate element of the forthcoming Economic Strategy focussing 

upon supporting individuals with qualifications in those sectors where there are 
skills shortages.

72

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYSTRATEGIC PILLAR 4

FOSTERING CIVIC PARTICIPATION

Promote civic participation, trust and a resilience 
culture between Glaswegians and the institutions 
that serve them.

We are proud of our trusted institutions and will build upon them to ensure a fair and 
equitable approach towards all Glaswegians. We will encourage and support a resilient 
vision at the heart of every public facing institution to ensure we are strong for the future. 
Glasgow’s success is reliant on the systems and institutions that deliver services. To ensure 
the city runs smoothly, it is essential that Glaswegians receive the support and services 
they need and that these services are targeted appropriately. These critical services and 
systems are delivered by a broad range of public institutions – including Glasgow City 
Council, the NHS, Scottish and UK government departments and agencies, Further and 
Higher education institutions, as well as the third sector, and the commercial sector. The 
approach, objectives, responsibilities and scope of operation of these organisations do not 
always reflect the boundaries and priorities of Glasgow – but may be set by wider agendas. 
These organisations are challenged on a daily basis by shifting macroeconomic trends or 
economic pressures.

There is no getting away from the fact that these are difficult times for Glasgow. Through 
the Transforming Glasgow programme, we are reshaping the way services are delivered to 
better meet the needs of Glaswegians. The focus is on developing more resilient service 

73

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYdelivery mechanisms that are fit for purpose, agile and responsive in the context of financial 
challenges, legislative changes and city priorities.

A collaborative approach is essential to improve the targeting and quality of services – with 
an improved understanding of gaps and the critical linkages and dependencies between 
different organisations and services. A relevant example is the current review of social and 
health care to deliver a more joined up and efficient service.

Goal 4.A.  Build capacity among citizens and decision-makers, enabling them to 
apply resilience thinking to their daily work and lives.
As people are our most important asset, our goal is to enable those living in Glasgow 
to fulfil their potential and access to opportunities to live healthy and prosperous lives. 
This our golden thread that ties together all of our strategic initiatives, more localised 
schemes and the development of individual resilient people.
We understand that knowledge and data are essential elements required for this goal 
achieved. Not only does this include the education of all Glaswegians so that they fully 
understand the challenges we are facing, it also involves ensuring the right tools and 
information are available, visual and accessible to all. 
Our partners have incredible capacity and knowledge in this area. We will break 
down silos between individual projects, bringing stakeholders together to ensure the 
development collaborative and effective new approaches.

RESILIENCE VALUE
Glaswegians will understand the challenges the city is facing and have the information 
they need in order to make smart and informed decisions now, and to plan for long-term 
challenges.

74

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYACTIONS UNDER THIS GOAL:
4.A.1  Develop a resilience lens toolkit to strengthen institutional risk and resilience 

plans. This will be applied to business as usual working processes.

4.A.2  Hold a Healthier Futures Forum about the implications of the resilience strategy 

for health and wellbeing in Glasgow.

4.A.3  Produce a resilience animation targeted at raising awareness among citizens.
4.A.4  Pilot a city resilience dashboard.
4.A.5  Explore and develop the concept of mature resilience via the Smart Mature 

Resilient (SMR) Cities EU Horizon 2020 project. This will enable the 
development of a European based toolkit to support a mature resilient 
city approach. The exploration will also consider a resilience standard and 
information portal for city stakeholders to share information.

4.A.6  Create opportunities for young resilience ambassadors to develop leadership 

skills, share learning and champion creative new resilience ideas.

4.A.7  Create a process that facilitates an educational resilience conversation between 

our young Glaswegians and their peers in other 100RC cities.

4.A.8  Support the development of an employee toolkit focused on developing 

individual and organisational resilience within the Glasgow Family.

4.A.9  Develop an effective mechanism for knowledge transfer and sharing of best 

practices between agencies.

4.A.10  Enhance resilience skills and understanding in critical service providers.

FEATURED ACTION 4.A.4. Pilot a city Resilience Dashboard.

Description: We will develop a digital online dashboard that illustrates and connects 

resilience initiatives that are taking place across Glasgow. This dashboard will 
link into our Open Glasgow platform and will build on the principles of making 
data open, transparent and visually usable. The dashboard will be used to 
collate data, showcase success, share learning and monitor progress. We will 
include a north Glasgow page that is tailored to the actions contained in this 
strategy. 

75

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY 

 

This action will increase the capacity to make coordinated decisions that are 
in line with the Single Outcome Agreement and the Transforming Glasgow 
Programme, both of which are focused on partnership working to deliver better 
outcomes for the people of Glasgow. An essential principle for this action is a 
smarter use of assets.
Timescale: Short Term - 2016 - 2017

Action owner and delivery partners: Glasgow City Council, Glasgow Community Planning 
Partnership, Scottish Canals, GCVGNP, GCPH, SNIFFER, Greenspace Scotland.
Target: Working Groups will be established. As well as the implementation of a digital dashboard, 
we will disseminate learning through the development of GIS/data guidance and demonstrations. 
This will be articulated through an awareness building programme that will facilitate the use of data 
to inform policy development and joined-up decision making.

“What this means to me”…
Leaders in your community will have the 
information they need to be able to make 
important local decisions.

MAKING EFFECTIVE USE OF CITY DATA THROUGH OUR FUTURE CITIES PROGRAMME

Through the Future City Glasgow programme, Glasgow has been exploring ways to harness 
the power of data and technology to make our city a better place to live, work and play.  
From the state-of the-art city operations centre to the creation of an innovative city data 
hub, Glasgow has been developing a series of initiatives to showcase the exiting potential 
offered by smart city technology.

76

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYOne example that put people at the very heart of the future city was the Easterhouse 
Addictions community mapping initiative with the Greater Easterhouse Alcohol Awareness 
Project (GEAPP). GEAPP is a local charity whose aim is to reduce the harm associated with 
the use of alcohol. A key goal for GEAPP is to help the community that it serves to discover 
what’s on and what is available within the local area; not just alcohol recovery services, but 
anything that can keep people in recovery active in ways that provide an alternative to the 
addictive behaviour.

Working with local communities with support from social enterprise Pidgin Perfect, and in 
collaboration with the Glasgow Community Planning Partnership and NHS Greater Glasgow 
and Clyde, a series of community mapping workshops were facilitated to map local assets 
and services available to people in recovery. A digitised the map was then developed, 
creating an online tool that allowed GEAPP and volunteers to maintain a local directory of 
services and assets.

When people are in recovery it can be difficult for them to navigate the services that are 
available. If people cannot find the services they need they can disengage from the recovery 
process altogether, withdrawing from the community and back into addictive behaviours. 
Now, with the mapping tool, those in recovery can see what is going on in their area, making 
it easier for them to get the access to the services they need. 

77

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYBy integrating data through local maps, this project brought together local stories with 
factual data in a way that enhances existing service delivery mechanisms. The resilience 
dividend is the creation and trust and empathy between agencies and communities.

FEATURED ACTION 4.A.5. Explore and develop the concept of mature resilience via 
the Smart Mature Resilient (SMR) Cities EU Horizon 2020 project. This will enable the 
development of a European based toolkit to support a mature resilient city approach. 
The exploration will also consider a resilience standard and information portal for city 
stakeholders to share information.

Description: We understand the importance of clear and concise information sharing. 

We understand the importance of continuous learning and that we need to 
document our journey for others to learn. In order to ensure a consistent and 
agreed approach to embed resilience through all organisations and structures. 
The city - through participation with the Smart Mature Resilient (SMR) Cities 
European Horizon 2020 project - will contribute towards the development of 
a resilience toolkit that provides resource and opportunities to develop and 
map city resilience. We will pilot and ensure the City Resilience Framework is 
integrated and aligned with the development of the toolkit. We understand 
the importance of information transfer and reducing silo thinking across city 
stakeholders. The development of an information exchange portal will work 
within suitable boundaries to create an easily accessible, easily navigated portal 
of city information relevant to city resilience.
Timescale: Short Term - 2016 - 2017

 

Action owner and delivery partners: 100RC cities – Vejle, Rome, Bristol – with Riga, Kristensaand, 
University of Strathclyde, European academic partners.
Target: A resilience toolkit with guideline practices, standards and a communications portal.

78

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY“What this means to me”…
Any public facing institution will be fair and 
equitable, and mindful of the needs of the 
future.

FEATURED ACTION 4.A.7. Create a process that facilitates an educational resilience 
conversation between our young Glaswegians and their peers in other 100RC cities.

Description: We will commence this project by working with young people from our schools 

and colleges. Our aim is to embed a deeper understanding of resilience 
through our education system. By doing so we will look to increasing young 
people’s awareness of the challenges facing Glasgow and the wider world. We 
believe that this greater understanding amongst young people is essential for 
developing our ability to respond to future shocks and stresses. To drive this 
knowledge and increase a sense of global citizenship among our young people, 
Glasgow will engage with 100RC and other cities in the 100RC network to 
create a schools cultural exchange programme that allows young Glaswegians 
to learn about the different resilience challenges we face.
Timescale: Short Term - 2016 - 2017

 

Action owner and delivery partners: Glasgow City Council, Glasgow Centre for Population 
Health, 100RC network, John Muir Trust, Thriving Places, Open Glasgow, University of Strathclyde, 
Digital Glasgow, SMR Project, and Education Scotland.
Target: By 2018, a cultural exchange programme underway between at least one school or youth 
organisation in Glasgow and peers in another 100RC city.

79

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY“What this means to me”…
Your children will have greater 
opportunities to connect with young 
people in cities around the world, 
developing their own skills as global 
citizens and resilience leaders of the future.

Goal 4.B.  Identify the opportunities for resilience building associated with 
devolution of powers to and from the City Council.

ACTIONS UNDER THIS GOAL:
4.B.1  Reach out to other cities in the 100RC network to understand how different 

legislative and political powers are being used to deliver resilience outcomes.

80

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY5
DELIVERING THE STRATEGY

The actions contained within this strategy will be delivered over an initial two year period 
from 2016 to 2018.  After this time, the actions will be refreshed. 

The Resilient Glasgow Strategy will be delivered through existing organisations, structural 
connections and delivery mechanisms by applying resilience as an explicit and intended 
consequence of strategies, initiatives and actions. New delivery structures and working 
groups will be only established where appropriate.
Strategy delivery will be coordinated by Glasgow City Council under the remit of the Chief 
Resilience Officer (CRO). This will be embedded in existing organisational structures.
This strategy requires a strong spirit of collaboration, drawing on a full range of expertise. 
The Resilient Glasgow Steering Group will be refreshed to increase involvement from city 
partners and ensure strategic direction is provided. This will include additional involvement 
from the private sector, the Glasgow Community Planning Partnership and the Transforming 
Glasgow programme. 

81

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYThe remit of the Resilient Glasgow Steering Group is to provide directional support, 
guidance and influence on our journey to greater resilience. The Steering Group will act as a 
senior strategic body that will function as a multi-agency city partnership, bringing together 
our public sector partners, businesses, academics and voluntary organisations. The Steering 
Group will exist for the entire strategy implementation period.

The Resilient Glasgow Steering Group will report formally to various Council Committees 
and other bodies as deemed appropriate.

COUNCIL COMMITTEES

RESILIENT GLASGOW STEERING GROUP

RESILIENT GLASGOW FORUM
RESILIENT GLASGOW TEAM

82

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYSupporting the Resilient Glasgow Steering Group will be the Resilient Glasgow Forum. 
The Resilient Glasgow Forum will consist of individuals from across the Council Family and 
our city partners. Members will have special interests, experience and knowledge in city 
resilience. The remit of the Resilient Glasgow Forum will be to:
• 
EVALUATE the progress of the Resilient Glasgow Action Plan
•  KNIT together related or cross cutting initiatives
• 
• 
•  CONSIDER the development of local and national influences
• 
•  DISSEMINATE learning at a citywide level.

IDENTIFY new conversations that should be had with citywide stakeholders
PROMOTE the application of a resilience lens to citywide activity 

IDENTIFY new opportunities that should be pursued and integrated into our programme

This strategy will be implemented with continued support and guidance from 100RC who 
will also provide additional resources through a selection of Platform Partners. Platform 
Partners are a variety of creative and influential global organisations committed to 
supporting the development of urban resilience.
Platform Partners will provide us with technical skills and expertise that will lend itself to 
support the delivery of some of the actions contained within our strategy.

We will proactively work with our city partners to be bid-
ready for new funding opportunities that will enhance our 
resilience building efforts. We will develop a mechanism 
for developing high-performing project collaborations.

We will create new opportunities for young resilience 
ambassadors to develop leadership skills, share learning 
and champion creative new resilience ideas.

83

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY6
MONITORING PROGRESS

DELIVERING THE STRATEGY
To ensure we deliver on our Resilient Glasgow strategy, we are developing a MONITORING 
and EVALUATING FRAMEWORK. This will allow us to monitor progress through data sets 
available from our city partners. This in turn will allow partners to appreciate the role their 
targets play in developing city resilience. In developing the Framework, we are taking 
account of:
•  Our particular resilience challenges and the goals/actions outlined in the strategy. 
• 
The data that is routinely collected by partners in the NHS, Scottish Government, 
Glasgow City Council and elsewhere to promote a resilience culture across services and 
organisations in the city.

•  Communication, learning and accountability. The indicators must be accessible and 

used reflectively by city partners and citizens to identify areas of progress or continuing 
challenge. For this reason, we are open to adding new indicators as the strategy 
develops and unfolds.

•  Accessibility of indicators. These will be made available on the Understanding 

Glasgow website, already a popular resource in the city with a wide range of resources 
(understandingglasgow.com).

Resilience Strategy Monitoring and Evaluation Reports will be fed through our core 
partnership groups for information and discussion on relevant issues as they arise. These 
core partnership groups include the:

Poverty Leadership Panel
Extended Corporate Management Team
Local Resilience Partnership

•  Community Planning Partnership
• 
• 
• 
•  Glasgow Economic Leadership
• 

Scottish Government

84

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY• 
• 

Resilient Glasgow Steering Group
Sustainable Glasgow Board.

Based on our outcomes, with ongoing dialogue with these core partnership groups, we will 
produce an Annual Resilience Statement which will articulate and include:

• 
• 
• 
• 

our yearly performance, with information on progress of the goals and actions
a narrative of our journey to greater resilience
emerging considerations that should be integrated into resilience practices
new collaborations or funding opportunities that could support the strategy 
implementation.

Our Annual Resilience Statement will be reported to Glasgow City Council’s Executive 
Committee before being published for dissemination to our partners and the wider 
Glasgow public. 
Measurement of our progress against the Monitoring and Evaluation Framework will form 
the basis for our Resilient Glasgow Strategy refresh in June 2018.

INDICATOR

SOURCE/DETAIL

REPORTING 
CYCLE

WHY IS IT INCLUDED AND HOW CAN IT 
BE USED?

Percentage of those with 
‘low’ and ‘high’ resilience

3 years

NHS Health and 
Wellbeing Survey. 
Individual level measures 
aggregating six measures: 
feels in control of 
decisions; does not 
feel isolated; valued as 
community member; 
influence on decisions; 
feels people look out for 
each other; volunteering.

Indicates change in social network and 
relational component of resilience. Relevant 
to people, place and civic engagement 
aspects of resilience strategy. Maintains 
an inequalities focus through ability to 
compare most deprived 15% with rest of 
city.

85

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYExamples of our indicators include:

INDICATOR

SOURCE/DETAIL

REPORTING 
CYCLE

WHY IS IT INCLUDED AND HOW CAN IT 
BE USED?

Employment rates

Yearly

Annual Population Survey. 
Can be displayed as a 
headline rate (working 
age population) and 
also by ethnic group, by 
gender and by disability.

Glasgow’s relative difference in 
employment (compared to UK cities) is a 
key vulnerability. Indicates one dimension 
of economic buoyancy. Displaying data 
for diversity groups moves beyond 
vulnerability understanding to one of 
opportunity across a diversity of groups- a 
resilience factor.

Business survival rate

Office of National 
Statistics: Survival rate of 
business in Glasgow and 
Clyde valley

Male and female Healthy 
Life Expectancy (HLE)

Census
ScotPHO

Illustration of economic adaptability and 
diversity of the economy

Part of 10 year 
census but 
HLE updated 
every 5 years

Poor health is one of Glasgow’s key 
vulnerabilities as are inequalities in health 
between deprived and less deprived 
areas. Will additionally allow monitoring of 
gender trends.

Vacant and derelict land 
/greenspace access and 
quality

Scottish Vacant and 
Derelict Land Survey/ 
Urban Audit
Percentage of people with 
500 m of VDL

Access to safe and neutral space for 
association, building social capital and 
feeling ownership of community assets 
is a key aspect of the strategy’s goal to 
empower citizens to build their personal 
and collective resilience

Child care access

3 years

NHS Health and 
Wellbeing Survey/ 
Perceived quality of 
childcare provision by 
deprivation and socio-
economic measures

Access to childcare is key interdependency 
between the economy and people/
communities dimensions of the strategy- 
acting as a barrier or facilitator to economic 
opportunity. For indication of success we 
would look for a narrowing gap between 
deprivation quintiles on those rating 
Excellent/Good.

86

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYAPPENDIX 1
SUMMARY OF RESILIENT GLASGOW GOALS AND ACTIONS

1 EMPOWERING GLASWEGIANS

GOAL

ACTION

ACTION OWNER

COMPLETION 
DATE

Map the availability of important local 
services in communities throughout the 
city.

Glasgow City 
Council Land and 
Environmental 
Services.

Undertake a gap analysis of important 
local services in communities, taking into 
account physical, cultural and territorial 
barriers to access.

Glasgow City 
Council Land and 
Environmental 
Services.

Improve equitable 
access to quality local 
services that foster 
wellbeing.

Empower community 
leaders through 
clear, instructive 
communications 
between city partners 
and the third sector.

1A1

1A2

1A3

1A4

1A5

1B1

1B2

1B3

Facilitate the further implementation 
and scaling up of Open Glasgow's 
Community Mapping tool, increasing 
digital skills and levels of community 
empowerment - with particular focus on 
groups subjected to inequalities.

Facilitate data sharing between public 
sector agencies and the third sector to 
drive interventions that fill service gaps, 
assist inter-agency coordination, and 
enhance integrated planning.

Develop an integrated resilience plan for 
critical services with respect to long-term 
stress.

Develop an understanding of what 
makes a strong community leader 
using information from case studies 
and university-led research. Use this 
information to develop briefings for third 
sector support to Glasgow's community 
leaders and community development 
workers.

Commission a study to understand how 
leadership can be nurtured through 
early years care and teaching. Use this 
information to develop briefings for care 
providers and schools. This work will 
explore management styles appropriate 
to early years nurture approaches.

Embed the broader resilience agenda 
as part of the objectives for the 
forthcoming Glasgow Volunteering 
Charter 2016-2019.

2017

2018

2017

2018

2017

Glasgow City 
Council Land and 
Environmental 
Services.

Glasgow City 
Council Corporate 
Services and Third 
Sector Forum

Glasgow City 
Council Land and 
Environmental 
Services

Glasgow Centre for 
Population Health

2017

Glasgow Centre for 
Population Health

2017

Glasgow’s Strategic 
Volunteering 
Framework Group

2016

87

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY1 EMPOWERING GLASWEGIANS

GOAL

ACTION

ACTION OWNER

COMPLETION 
DATE

Use existing assets to 
create healthy, safe 
and inclusive spaces 
for the community 
to network, helping 
to mitigate social 
isolation

Influence the Scottish 
Government agenda 
on social and 
community resilience

1C1

1C2

1C3

1D1

Review levels of control over existing 
public assets and patterns of use 
to determine spaces that could be 
programmed for community use.

Glasgow 
Community 
Planning Partnership

2018

Explore the implications of the 
Community Empowerment Act 
(Scotland) 2015 potential to transfer 
control of public assets to communities.

Glasgow City 
Council Corporate 
Services

2016

Work with partners to ensure that 
community spaces are utilised in a way 
that benefits all community groups.

Continue to engage Scottish 
Government with the Resilient Glasgow 
initiative and conversely attend Scottish 
Government meetings to collaborate 
and allow knowledge exchange - 
helping to expand community resilience 
to a broader social resilience agenda.

2018

2016

Glasgow City 
Council Land and 
Environmental 
Services

Glasgow City 
Council Land and 
Environmental 
Services

*   The named owners are responsible for leading and coordinating the delivery of relevant 
actions. The delivery of each action will be done in full collaboration with all of the delivery 
partners named in Appendix 2.

88

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY2 UNLOCKING PLACE-BASED SOLUTIONS

GOAL

Create an integrated 
resilience exemplar in 
the north of the city.

ACTION

2A1

Develop spatial supplementary 
guidance for North of Glasgow, 
integrating resilience drivers.

ACTION OWNER

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

Glasgow City 
Council Land and 
Environmental 
Services

Develop the legacy of the Urban Living 
Partnership bid jointly with the academic 
sector, integrating resilience as the 
central approach.

As part of the E COST Sub Urban 
Action develop UK’s first statutory 
Supplementary Guidance for subsurface 
planning.  Integrating above and 
beneath the ground data, mapping, 
guidance & policy.

Use of the Resilient Europe URBACT III 
project to focus on Possilpark. Working 
with city partners connecting existing 
activity at neighbourhood level and 
exploring resilient institutions, place and 
people with local community groups to 
develop an integrated local action plan.

2A2

2A3

2A4

2A5

Delivery of Glasgow’s Open Space 
strategy and development of local 
contexts that provide scoping and 
background information for six Strategic 
Development frameworks.

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

2A6

Identify a process whereby resilience can 
be built into the City Development Plan  
Action Programme.

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

COMPLETION 
DATE

2018

2018

2016

2018

2016

2018

89

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY2 UNLOCKING PLACE-BASED SOLUTIONS

GOAL

ACTION

ACTION OWNER

COMPLETION 
DATE

Tackle the local 
impacts of global 
climate change.

2B1

2B2

Learn from other cities in the 
100RC global network about urban 
interventions to increase the amenity 
value of water management solutions.

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

Prepare guidance on climate ready 
design and promote adoption by 
developers, planners and designers, 
particularly focusing on building retrofit 
to ensure long-term fitness for function.

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

2C1

Address the 
disconnect between 
North Glasgow and the 
rest of the city.

Initiate a conversation between 
Glasgow City Council and transport 
service providers to develop a shared 
understanding of challenges and 
opportunities for improved connections.

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

2018

2019

2021+

90

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY3 INNOVATING FOR FAIR ECONOMIC GROWTH

GOAL

Support the 
development of 
innovative ideas that 
will contribute to 
new urban solutions, 
business development 
and new technology 
ideas.

ACTION

3A1

3A2

ACTION OWNER

Identify and make available spatial data 
sets needed to help identify and enable 
integrated resilience actions, including 
data sets that are currently 'closed'

Glasgow City 
Council Land and 
Environmental 
Services

COMPLETION 
DATE

2018

Facilitate a city wide conversation to 
better understand the way in which 
risk deter/drives investment and how 
resilience informs the way in which 
investors and insurance companies are 
making decisions. 

Provide an annual resilience statement 
based on metrics established to provide 
investor confidence and a reporting 
mechanism for activity.

3A3

Hold a hackathon/Challenge Lab to 
support the development of innovative 
urban resilience solutions, business 
development and new technologies.

3A4

Roll out a programme of foundation 
apprenticeships for young people in 
Glasgow. 

Work with our educational institutions 
and industry to implement an 
apprenticeship mechanism that is 
specifically targeted to addressing the 
potential skills gap within the financial 
service sector.

Glasgow City 
Council Land and 
Environmental 
Services and 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

3A5

Develop a working process with our city 
partners and educational institutions 
to develop a suite of climate resilient 
design project proposals. This will 
increase collaborative capacity, ensuring 
that we are in the best position to bid for 
emerging project funding.

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services and Land 
and Environmental 
Services

2018

2018

2020

2020

91

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY3 INNOVATING FOR FAIR ECONOMIC GROWTH

GOAL

ACTION

ACTION OWNER

COMPLETION 
DATE

3B1

3B2

3B3

Ensure that the new Economic Strategy 
contains a strong focus on the delivery 
of 'a more flexible and responsive city 
resource'. This should be centred around 
a strong business base that is adaptable 
to changing economic conditions and 
political administration priorities.

2021+

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

Identify how data analytics can be better 
used to drive efficiency and inform 
policy interventions. Use this evidence 
to develop a more focussed approach to 
deployment of support and resources.

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

Identify support interventions for 
inclusion in the new Economic Strategy. 
These will focus on the development 
of resilient and sustainable business 
practices. We will support SMEs across 
the business lifecycle, from start-up 
through growth to maturity.

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

2020

2018

3C1

Initiate sub-group with 100RC, inviting 
relevant post-industrial cities to 
participate.

2016

Glasgow City 
Council Land and 
Environmental 
Services

Through a 'New 
Approach to 
Enterprise' we will 
support new and 
existing businesses to 
grow.

Initiate a post-industrial 
city sub-group with 
our 100RC partners 
to share and learn 
from best practice 
and experiences 
of economic 
transformation from 
those cities with similar 
post-industrial profile.

2016

Glasgow City 
Council Land and 
Environmental 
Services

3C2

Glasgow to chair first meeting of post-
industrial sub-group. Exploration of 
topics including 
-  Macro-economic transition, 
- 

Business continuity planning and 
emergency response, 
Effective models of childcare, 
elderly care and employment.

- 

92

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY3 INNOVATING FOR FAIR ECONOMIC GROWTH

GOAL

ACTION

ACTION OWNER

COMPLETION 
DATE

3D1

Complete a gap analysis of the aspects 
of ‘Work and Worth’ not currently being 
addressed by Poverty Leadership Panel.

Glasgow Centre for 
Population Health

2017

Tackle poverty, 
including in-work 
poverty and in-
work-progression, 
preventing and 
mitigating the impacts 
of poverty for and with 
Glaswegians.

3D2

3D3

3D4

3E1

3E2

3E3

Continue to increase 
the skill levels of  
Glasgow's working age 
population using the 
Glasgow Guarantee 
and other initiatives.

Facilitate discussions with economic 
partners to ensure societal resilience is 
an explicit and intended outcome of new 
economic interventions.

Glasgow City 
Council Land and 
Environmental 
Services

2016

Glasgow Centre for 
Population Health

2016

Explore opportunities for changes to 
care models to mitigate impacts based 
on learning around poverty and access 
to employment.

Embed objectives of socio-economic 
resilience throughout the forthcoming 
Economic Strategy.

Identify opportunities for providing 
employment support to SMEs that assist 
with business growth and increases the 
prosperity of the Glasgow City economy.

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

Work with the education system and 
local industry to identify where there are 
new training and learning opportunities 
for our young people, focusing on 
developing the skills required for a more 
resilient economy, now and in the future.

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

Deliver a graduate element of the 
forthcoming Economic Strategy 
focussing upon supporting individuals 
with qualifications in those sectors where 
there are skills shortages.

Glasgow 
City Council 
Development 
and Regeneration 
Services

2016

2018

2018

2016

93

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY4 FOSTERING CIVIC PARTICIPATION

GOAL

ACTION

ACTION OWNER

COMPLETION 
DATE

Build capacity among 
citizens and decision-
makers, enabling them 
to apply resilience 
thinking to their daily 
work and lives.

4A1

4A2

4A3

4A4

4A5

4A6

Develop a resilience lens toolkit 
to strengthen institutional risk and 
resilience plans. This will be applied to 
business as usual working processes.

Glasgow City 
Council Land and 
Environmental 
Services

2016

Hold a Healthier Futures Forum about 
the implications of the resilience strategy 
for health and wellbeing in Glasgow.

Glasgow Centre for 
Population Health

2016

Produce a resilience animation targeted 
at raising awareness among citizens.

Glasgow Centre for 
Population Health

2016

2016

Glasgow City 
Council Land and 
Environmental 
Services

Glasgow 
City Council 
Land and 
Environmental 
Services

2017

Glasgow City 
Council Land and 
Environmental 
Services

Pilot a City Resilience Dashboard, 
connecting resilience initiatives, collating 
data, showcasing success, monitoring 
progress and sharing learning. This 
data would be used to inform policy 
development and joined up decision-
making.   
This will include a North Glasgow 
focus space bringing projects together 
through a ‘resilience lens’. 

Explore and develop the concept of 
mature resilience via the Smart Mature 
Resilient (SMR) Cities EU Horizon 
2020 project. This will enable the 
development of a European based 
toolkit to support a mature resilient 
city approach. The exploration will also 
consider a resilience standard and 
information portal for city stakeholders 
to share information.

With an initial focus on North Glasgow 
work with educational institutions, in 
partnership with the John Muir Trust, 
to explore people and place based 
resilience issues. This approach will 
be scaled up and applied to other 
communities.
Create opportunities for young resilience 
ambassadors to develop leadership 
skills, share learning and champion 
creative new resilience ideas.

94

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY4 FOSTERING CIVIC PARTICIPATION

GOAL

ACTION

4A7

4A8

4A9

4A10

4B1

Identify the challenges 
and opportunities for 
resilience building 
associated with 
devolution of powers 
to and from the City 
Council.

ACTION OWNER

COMPLETION 
DATE

Glasgow City 
Council Education 
Services

2016

Facilitate an educational resilience 
exchange between our young 
Glaswegians and their peers in fellow 
100RC cities, inspiring a stronger sense 
of global citizenship and awareness of 
shared resilience challenges.

Support the development of an 
employee toolkit focused on developing 
individual and organisational resilience 
across the Glasgow family.

Glasgow City 
Council Corporate 
Services

2016

Develop an effective process for 
knowledge transfer and sharing of best 
practice approaches between public 
body agencies.

Glasgow City 
Council Corporate 
Services

2021

Enhance the resilience skills and 
understanding in critical service 
providers through the delivery of 
operational and skills programmes 
based on scenario planning exercises.

Local Resilience 
Partnership and 
Glasgow City 
Council Corporate 
Services

2018

Reach out to other cities in the 100RC 
network to understand how powers 
are being used to deliver resilience 
outcomes. Map this knowledge across to 
the powers that Glasgow holds or could 
delegate to citizens and others.

University of 
Strathclyde

2017

*   The named owners are responsible for leading and coordinating the delivery of relevant 
actions. The delivery of each action will be done in full collaboration with all of the delivery 
partners named in Appendix 2

95

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGYAPPENDIX 2
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Our Resilient Glasgow Strategy was achieved through collaborative insights and efforts from 
the people of Glasgow. We would like to thank each person who participated in our public 
consultation activities. 

We would particularly like to thank the following organisations and groups for their 

dedicated contributions to date, and continued commitment as we move forwards into 
strategy implementation.

RESILIENT GLASGOW TEAM
Alastair Brown (Chief Resilience Officer)
Duncan Booker
Frankie Barrett
Julie Robertson

SUPPORTED BY
100 Resilient Cities – Cristiana Fragola, Scott 
Rosenstein
Arup – Alan Richmond, Paula Kirk, Joanna 
Corrigan, Laura Frost, Harriet O’Brien

APPENDIX 2
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

DELIVERY PARTNERS
Glasgow Centre for Population Health
Glasgow City Council Family
NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde
Police Scotland
Scottish Fire and Rescue
Scottish Government
Scottish Power Energy Networks

WITH GUIDANCE FROM
Adaptation Scotland
British Geological Survey
BT
Climate Ready Clyde
Clyde Gateway
Clydeplan
Community Council Discussion Forum
Community Planning Partnership
Education Scotland
First Bus Scotland
Glasgow and Clyde Valley Green Network 
Partnership
Glasgow Chamber of Commerce
Glasgow Clyde College
Glasgow Council for the Voluntary Sector
Glasgow Disability Alliance
Glasgow Economic Leadership
Glasgow Homelessness Network
Glasgow School of Art
Glasgow Urban Design Panel
Greenspace Scotland
Interfaith Glasgow

Scottish Water
Scottish Environmental Protection Agency
Strathclyde Partnership for Transport
Third Sector Forum
University of Glasgow
University of Strathclyde
Wheatley Group

Joseph Rowntree Foundation
Lambhill Stables
Local Resilience Partnership
Metropolitan Glasgow Strategic Drainage 
Partnership
PASCAL International Observatory
Poverty Leadership Panel
Roma Net Project
Scottish Ambulance
Scottish Canals
Scottish Council for Development and 
Industry
Scottish Enterprise
Scottish Natural Heritage 
Scottish Renewables
SNIFFER
Sustainable Glasgow Board
The Wise Group
Transport Scotland
Volunteer Glasgow
West of Scotland Regional Equalities 
Council

97

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY98

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY99

OUR RESILIENT GLASGOW STRATEGY100

CITIES

‘Join the conversation - #ResilientGlasgow’

