ReImagina 

Puerto Rico Report

Reimagina Puerto 

Rico Report

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO  
ADVISORY COMMISSION

Malu Blázquez Arsuaga
Juan A. González Moscoso
Luis F. Cintrón Piñero
Cristina A. Fawaz López
Alicia Díaz Santiago
Héctor M. Cortés Ramírez
Vilmaris Rodríguez 

Co-Chairs
Richard L. Carrión
Dr. Carmen Milagros Concepción
Dr. Ana María García Blanco
Miguel A. Soto-Class
Federico (Friedel) Stubbe

Contributors
100 Resilient Cities
The Rockefeller Foundation
Open Society Foundations
Ford Foundation
AECOM
RITA 
Center for a New Economy
Big Think Group
Espacios Abiertos

Editors
Malu Blázquez Arsuaga
Félix Aponte-González
Isabel Beltrán
Josh Sawislak

Cristina A. Fawaz López
Alicia Díaz Santiago
Claire Bohnam-Carter
T. Luke Young
Shereen D'Souza
María Elena Joglar Cadilla
Rebecca Banuchi
Juan A. González Moscoso
Luis F. Cintrón Piñero

Citation
Resilient Puerto Rico Advisory 
Commission. (2018). ReImagina 
Puerto Rico Report. San Juan, PR.

Cover Foto Reference 
Cabo Rojo, PR. Elías Núñez

Design 
.Puntoaparte
Editorial Direction
Andrés Barragán
Graphic Designers
Sara Vergara
Laura Gutiérrez
Hansel Martínez

Publication Date
June 20th, 2018
Last Revision Date
July 31st, 2018

San Juan, PR. Prayitno

San Juan, PR. Lorie Shaull

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSIONLETTER FROM THE
CO-CHAIRS

On  January,  when  we  were  presented  with  the 
opportunity to be part of  ReImagina Puerto Rico, the 
now Co-Chairs accepted the invitation enthusiastically 
because we were interested in making a contribution 
through a process and a project created to steer Puerto 
Rico in the aftermath of  one of  the worst disasters in 
our history.

All five of  us understood, from the very beginning, that 
the final product of  this effort was not to develop a 
comprehensive plan, but rather a report that lays out 
priorities for the reconstruction of  Puerto Rico.

It would have been very easy for ReImagina Puerto Rico 
to convene an executive committee that shared the same 
visions on how to rebuild Puerto Rico. However, we 
opted to create a diverse group that reflected the Puerto 
Rican reality and our rich diversity of  perspectives.

We  strived  to  receive  a  great  number  of   ideas 
from diverse groups in the Island and the diaspora 
communities in the United States. To achieve this, we 
organized 77 meetings and/or activities, which garnered 
the participation of  748 persons and generated 485 
ideas for steering the reconstruction of  the country.

After many months of  intense work where we counted 
with the support from the ReImagina Puerto Rico 
team, we managed to achieve consensus on the vast 
majority of  the recommendations included in the report 

and were close to reaching agreement on others. It is a 
great triumph, considering all the difficulties that arise 
when people that want the best for the country, but have 
different visions, experiences, and opinions, sit in a table 
to work together.

In  one  aspect,  this  report  is  a  first  step  and  does 
not go far enough to address all the challenges that 
lie  ahead.  From  another  perspective,  some  of   the 
recommendations could be deemed controversial. But 
at the end of  this long journey, it is clear to us that we 
were able to push forward and seize this moment and 
historic opportunity for our people.

In adhering to this report, all five of  us Co-Chairs 
validate this effort as transparent, broad, and noble in its 
aspirations. And we support it, not only for what is stated 
or proposed, but also for the hope that it represents.

RICHARD L. CARRIÓN
CARMEN M. CONCEPCIÓN
ANA MARÍA GARCÍA BLANCO
MIGUEL A. SOTO CLASS
FEDERICO STUBBE ARSUAGA

5REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTLETTER FROM THE 
FOUNDATIONS

In the aftermath of  Hurricane María, we witnessed the 
largest humanitarian crisis Puerto Rico has ever faced. 
The world watched in horror while an entire island, 
home to 3.4 million people, was devastated.
 
The physical damage and death toll have been well 
documented – a new Harvard study, recently published 
in the New England Journal of  Medicine, estimates that 
at least 4,645 deaths can be linked to the hurricane 
and its immediate aftermath. A massive disruption in 
healthcare delivery, combined with the prolonged loss 
of  vital utilities such as energy and drinking water, help 
explain this terrible human cost. In addition, there were 
billions of  dollars in damage to natural and physical 
infrastructure – especially an antiquated and fragile 
electric grid that has left too many on the Island in 
the dark eight months after the storm – and tens of  
thousands of  businesses shut down. 
 
But the powerful hurricane wasn’t the only reason 
that the damage was so severe. Before the waves came 
ashore last September, the Island was struggling with 
a host of  serious challenges, including jobs and fiscal 
crises, which combined to magnify the impacts of  the 
storm and added barriers to full recovery. 
 
In  the  wake  of   this  disaster,  The  Rockefeller 
Foundation,  Ford  Foundation  and  Open  Society 

Foundations recognized the urgency of  helping Puerto 
Ricans recover from María and seize an extraordinary 
opportunity – the potential of  billions of  dollars in 
federal  recovery  funds  and  a  unique,  galvanizing 
moment.  We  recognized  an  opportunity  to  help 
the extraordinary people of  Puerto Rico to shift the 
trajectory of  the Island in a fundamental way. 
 
We sought to build on our experience in the wake 
of  other catastrophic disasters, including hurricanes 
Sandy and Katrina, and to provide the resources, 
expertise and space so that a dedicated and diverse 
group  of   Puerto  Ricans  could  take  stock  of   the 
current situation and recommend key actions and 
initiatives to make the Island more equitable and 
resilient – better prepared to face the future.
 
In this way, the ReImagina Puerto Rico project was 
born. The project was created in partnership with 100 
Resilient Cities (100RC), an organization pioneered by 
The Rockefeller Foundation to promote resilient solutions 
to the physical, social, and economic challenges of  the 
21st century. Together, the project's five co-chairs, 22 
commissioners representing diverse stakeholder groups, 
and the experienced 100RC team have produced a long-
term strategy for a resilient recovery. They have done so in 
consultation with the communities most affected, as well 
as public officials and technical experts across the globe. 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION6If   this  planning  effort  is  successful,  key 
recommendations  will  be  adopted  by  the 
federal and local agencies that have taken part 
in this process and also by businesses, faith and 
community institutions, and philanthropic funders. 
Some  recommendations  will  ,  with  no  doubt, 
inspire new ideas and responses, not yet captured in 
these recommendations, and make a more indirect 
contribution to the community's recovery. This is, 
as it should be, an ongoing, collective effort of  
learning by doing.
 
What's most critical is that the Island not just bounce 
back from this disaster but come back stronger, 
charting a path toward greater equity, prosperity, 
and justice – a dynamic community with better 
educational outcomes, a stronger and more diverse 
economy, a healthier and happier population, a 
place that those who have left the island might want 
to return to and call home again.
 
Hurricane María was a crisis unlike any that Puerto 
Rico has ever seen. But this crisis has presented us all 
with a potentially transformative opportunity. Our 
aim is simply this: To help leaders and innovators from 
across the island, and the large and vibrant Puerto 
Rican diaspora as well, to seize that opportunity and 
improve the lives of  millions for years to come. 

DR. RAJIV J. SHAH
PRESIDENT, THE ROCKEFELLER 
FOUNDATION 

MICHAEL BERKOWITZ
PRESIDENT, 100 RESILIENT CITIES 

DARREN WALKER
PRESIDENT, FORD FOUNDATION

PATRICK GASPARD
PRESIDENT, OPEN SOCIETY 
FOUNDATIONS

7REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTLETTER FROM THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 

I am extremely grateful for having the opportunity 
to act as Executive Director of  the Resilient Puerto 
Rico Advisory Commission and be able to lead the 
ReImagina Puerto Rico project in the aftermath of  
Hurricanes  Irma  and  María  which  brought  such 
devastation and suffering to Puerto Rico. This moment 
in history is crucial for reimagining development and 
reconstruction efforts in Puerto Rico with more public 
participation and transparency in the recovery processes 
where the people of  Puerto Rico take an active role in 
forging the new vision of  the Island. Our combined 
efforts have been directed to help rebuild Puerto Rico 
in a way that makes the Island stronger – physically, 
economically, and socially – and better prepared to 
confront future challenges.  

After  many  ReImagina  Puerto  Rico  meetings  from 
February through May of 2018 and much effort, we have 
developed a total of  97 actionable recommendations 
focused in Housing, Energy, Physical Infrastructure, 
Health,  Education  &  Social  Services,  Economic 
Development, and Natural Infrastructure for how to 
maximize recovery funds. We have curated 17 of  these 
recommended actions as high priority and impactful 
for the resilient reconstruction of  Puerto Rico. We also 

established  six  strategies  and  four  guiding  recovery 
principles to steer the reconstruction efforts to assure 
we maximize social well-being in all investments, we 
emphasize equity, inclusiveness, and transparency at 
all levels of  policy making, and foster coordination and 
collaboration while establishing effective and equitable 
community participation and developing resilient and 
empowered communities. Actions presented range from 
establishing reliable and diversified backup energy systems 
for vulnerable individuals and critical facilities, such as 
hospitals, schools, and emergency shelters and services 
facilities, to updating the Island’s digital land cadaster and 
developing feasible models to establish land tenure and 
community ownership in informal housing.

I am extremely happy and proud to be part of  this 
unique effort. We placed great emphasis in hearing, 
interacting and connecting with many different voices 
and perspectives throughout the Island and in searching 
for alignment and consensus on actions for a resilient 
reconstruction. We participated in more than 77 meetings 
with more than 748 individuals, including subject matter 
experts and other representatives from academia, private 
and public sector, and community leaders and NGOs. We 
developed an accelerated timeline and engagement plan 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION8in order to produce recommended actions in time 
to influence required government planning efforts. 
We are hopeful that these recommendations will be 
integrated into the reconstruction plans required by 
the government and that ReImagina Pueto Rico 
will be able to collaborate with many actors in their 
implementation and monitoring.

Many thanks to the Co-Chairs for leading this effort, 
and Ford Foundation, Open Society Foundations, and 
The Rockefeller Foundation and 100 Resilient Ciites 
for supporting this unique and important project. 
Thanks to the many participants who collaborated 
in one way or another and a special thanks to the 
ReImagina staff for always going the extra mile. We all 
need to continue collaborating and working together in 
building the new and stronger Puerto Rico.

MALU BLÁZQUEZ ARSUAGA
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR

9REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTEXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY

The catastrophic events caused by Hurricanes Irma and 
María in September 2017 elevated a common plea to 
reimagine Puerto Rico, as it moves forward on its path 
towards recovery and reconstruction. This process should 
not focus only on replacing outdated infrastructure, but 
also must foster a social and economic transformation 
across the Island to create a more just, equitable and 
resilient  society.  As  part  of   the  numerous  recovery 
efforts that emerged, the Resilient Puerto Rico Advisory 
Commission (the Commission) was created in November 
2017 to serve as a unifying force among a diverse group 
of  Puerto Rican voices. 

The Commission’s goal is to promote a stronger, 
more resilient Puerto Rico as it embarks on reimagining 
development  and  reconstruction  with  more  public 
participation and transparency in the recovery processes 
where the people of  Puerto Rico take an active role in 
forging the vision of  the Island. The Commission’s core 
project, ReImagina Puerto Rico, aimed at producing 
an actionable and timely set of  recommendations for 
how to maximize philanthropic, local government, and 
federal recovery funds. The purpose of the project was to 
help rebuild Puerto Rico in a way that makes the Island 
stronger – physically, economically, and socially – and 
better prepared to confront future challenges.

The Commission adopted an accelerated timeframe 
to  produce  this  report  to  complement  on-going 
post-disaster recovery efforts being enforced by U.S. 
federal agencies, Puerto Rico government and non-
governmental  organizations  (NGOs)  across  Puerto 
Rico.  The  Commission  embarked  in  a  broad  and 

participatory outreach approach toward Puerto Rico’s 
recovery and reconstruction, enabling a conversation 
among a diverse collection of  voices to build consensus 
while identifying opportunities to embed resilience in the 
rebuilding efforts. Considering the extent of  the federal 
and philanthropic funding available to support recovery 
actions in the aftermath of  Hurricanes Irma and María, 
contributions from the ReImagina Puerto Rico project 
to this effort will provide significant insight to responsible 
government agencies and NGOs toward achieving more 
resilient recovery actions.

During the process adopted by ReImagina Puerto 
Rico, important recommendations surfaced that the 
Commission identified and developed. While there may 
be many paths to recovery, the Commission established a 
set of recommended principles to steer all chosen paths. 

These guiding recovery principles are:

Maximize social well-being in 
all investments 

Prioritize qquity and 
inclusiveness 

Ensure transparency at all 
levels of policy making 

Emphasize and foster coordination 
and collaboration 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION10ReImagina  Puerto  Rico  divided  the  work  into  six 
broad topic areas: (1) Housing; (2) Energy; (3) Physical 
Infrastructure; (4) Health, Education & Social Services; (5) 
Economic Development; and (6) Natural Infrastructure. 
Developing actionable recommendations required 
a clear definition of  the scope and reach of  the issues 
these initiatives address. The purpose of  well-defining 
the scope was to promote realistic expectations and 
avoid setting overambitious goals that ignore the current 
social, economic, and institutional landscape that define 
Puerto Rico’s context. As such, ReImagina Puerto Rico 
established the following sector goals: 

•  Housing:  Develop  a  portfolio  of   strategies 
that  reduce  risk  exposure,  foster  community 
empowerment,  and  address  the  diversity  in 
socioeconomic  conditions,  housing  types,  and 
tenure in Puerto Rico.

•  Energy: Address Puerto Rico’s energy needs by 
transforming its electric power infrastructure into 
an affordable, reliable and innovative system, while 
reducing adverse impacts on human health and 
the environment. 

•  Physical Infrastructure: Develop and maintain 
infrastructure systems that are accessible, integrated, 
flexible, and robust enough so they may sustain 
critical operations for the well-being of  Puerto 
Ricans.

•  Health,  Education,  &  Social  Services: 
Develop initiatives that ensure the provision of  
health, educational and social services to reduce 
existing  and  future  vulnerabilities,  and  chart 
a  pathway  toward  improved  equity  and  well-
being, with more participation of  the people in its 
definition and implementation.

•  Economic Development: Craft a diversified 
portfolio  of   economic  activities  that  augment 
Puerto  Rico’s  resiliency  by  enhancing  existing 

capabilities, improving employment prospects, and 
reducing inequalities. 

•  Natural Infrastructure: Improve human health 
and well-being, foster economic development, and 
reduce exposure to hazards, through the sustainable 
use of  Puerto Rico’s natural resources.

To help jumpstart the required planning efforts, 
ReImagina Puerto Rico has put forward specific and 
actionable  recommendations  that  comprehensively 
address unmet needs, ongoing challenges and mitigate 
the impact of  future disasters.

As part of  the project’s outreach process, ReImagina 
Puerto Rico also convened community members and 
leaders,  grassroots  organizations,  business  leaders, 
government  officials,  and  representatives  from 
professional  organizations,  among  other  groups. 
Furthermore, it provided a common platform to discuss 
concerns and aspirations regarding a stronger Puerto 
Rico. The ReImagina Puerto Rico process proposed six 
crosscutting strategies to achieve the recovery principles 
and a set of  97 recommended actions spanning across 
all working group sectors. Recommendations include 18 
Housing sector actions; 12 for the Energy sector; 30 for 
Physical Infrastructure; 9 for Health, Education & Social 
Services; 12 for Economic Development; and 16 for the 
Natural Infrastructure sector. This report highlights 17 
of  these recommendations identified as high priority, 
actionable and address critical issues for the recovery 
and reconstruction of  Puerto Rico. 

The results of this report are but an initial step toward 
a broader journey seeking the reimagining of  Puerto 
Rico, as it reinvents itself in the wake of major disasters. 
The Commission steadfastly promotes that the set of  
recommendations put forth in the ReImagina Puerto Rico 
project provide a clear initial path toward the long-term 
recovery and reconstruction of Puerto Rico. The story of  
the new Puerto Rico is yet to be written. 

11REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTCONTENTS

01

02

INTRODUCTION

STRATEGIC 
RECOMMENDATIONS

P 20P 4403

04

05

METHODOLOGY

APPENDIXES

PUERTO RICO'S 
PATH TO RESILIENT 
RECOVERY AND 
RECONSTRUCTION 

P 98P 116P 122Acronyms

100 RC 100 Resilient Cities

ACA Affordable Care Act

ACS American Community Survey

ADUs Accessory Dwelling Units

AES Agricultural Extension Service

AGC Associated General Contractors of  America

AIDIS Inter-American Association of  Sanitary and 
Environmental Engineering

AMA, by its Spanish acronym Puerto Rico 
Metropolitan Bus Authority

ARRA American Recovery and Reinvestment Act

ASSMCA, by its Spanish acronym Puerto Rico 
Administration of  Mental Health and Anti-Addiction 
Services 

BLS United States Bureau of  Labor Statistics

BTOP Broadband Technology Opportunities Program

Business PREP Business Preparedness and  
Resiliency Program

CAAPPR, by its Spanish acronym Puerto Rico College 
of  Architects and Landscape Architects

Manatí, PR. Cristina A. Fawaz López

CAGR Compound Annual Growth Rate

CAIDI Customer Average Interruption Duration Index

CBA Community Benefits Agreements

CBO Community-Based Organizations

CCLC United States Department of  Education – 21st 
Century Community Learning Centers

CDBG Community Development Block Grant

CDBG-DR Community Development Block Grant  
Disaster Recovery

CDBs Community Development Banks

CDC Center for Disease Control and Prevention

CDCorps Community Development Corporations

CDFIs Community Development Financial Institutions

CED Community Economic Development

CHDOs Community Housing Development Organizations

CHIP Children’s Health Insurance Program

CHP Combined Heat Power

CIAPR Puerto Rico College of  Engineers and  
Land Surveyors

CNE Center for a New Economy

Business Financing of  Commerce and Communities (now 
known as "lendreamers")

COOP Continuity of  Operations Plan

COR3 Puerto Rico Central Office of  Recovery, 
Reconstruction, and Resilience

CRA Community Reinvestment Act

CRF City Resilience Framework

CRIM, by its Spanish acronym Puerto Rico  
Municipal Revenue Collection Center

CSR Corporate Social Responsibility

DACO, by its Spanish acronym Puerto Rico Office of  
Consumer Affairs

DEDC Puerto Rico Department of  Economic Development 
and Commerce

DHS United States Department of  Homeland Security

DIRS Disaster Information Reporting System

DIY Do It Yourself

DNER Puerto Rico Department of  Natural and 
Environmental Resources

DOLHR Puerto Rico Department of  Labor and  
Human Resources

COFECC, by its Spanish acronym Corporation for 

DOS United States Department of  State

DTPW Puerto Rico Department of  Transportation and 
Public Works 

EDA United States Economic Development Administration

EOP Puerto Rico Emergency Operation Plan

EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency

EQB Puerto Rico Environmental Quality Board

EQIP Environmental Quality Incentives Program

EWP-FPE Emergency Watershed Protection - Floodplain 
Easement Program

FAA Federal Aviation Administration

HIPAA Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act

HMGP FEMA Hazard Mitigation Grant Program

HMP Puerto Rico Hazard Mitigation Plan

HRSA United States Health Resources and  
Services Administration

HUD United States Department of  Housing and  
Urban Development

INE Instituto Nueva Escuela

IoT Internet of  Things

IRP Integrated Resource Plan

FCC Federal Communications Commission

IRS Internal Revenue Service

FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency

ISWM Integrated Solid Waste Management

FHWA Federal Highway Administration

KPIs Key Performance Indicators

FIDEVI, by its Spanish acronym Puerto Rico Housing 
and Human Development Fund

FIRM Flood Insurance Rate Maps

FOMB Financial Oversight and Management Board for 
Puerto Rico

KW Kilowatt

LIHTC Low-Income Housing Tax Credits

LISC Local Initiatives Support Corporation

LMI Low to Moderate Income

FQHCs Federally Qualified Health Centers

LQ Location Quotient

FTA Federal Transit Administration

MA Medicare Advantage

GAR Governor’s Authorized Representative

MBA Mortgage Bankers Association of  Puerto Rico

GIS Geographic Information System

MCOs Managed Care Organizations

HHS United States Department of  Health and  
Human Services

HiAP Health in All Policies

MGD Million Gallons Per Day

MIT Massachusetts Institute of  Technology

MSA Metropolitan Statistical Area

MUSV Movimiento Una Sola Voz

NAICS North American Industry Classification System

NDRF National Disaster Recovery Framework

NERC North American Electric Reliability Corporation

NFIP National Flood Insurance Program

PICA, by its Spanish acronym Four Year  
Investment Program

PMO Puerto Rico Permits Management Office

PPA Power Purchase Agreement

PR Science Trust Puerto Rico Science, Technology  
& Research Trust

NGOs Non-Governmental Organizations

PRASA Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority

NIH National Institutes of  Health

PRBA Puerto Rico Bankers Association

NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

PRBC Puerto Rico Building Code

NRCS Natural Resources Conservation Service

PRCC Puerto Rico Chamber of  Commerce

NTIA National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration

O&M Operations and Maintenance

OCIO Puerto Rico Office of  the Chief  Information Officer

OCPR Office of  the Comptroller of  Puerto Rico

OCS, by its Spanish acronym Office of  the 
Commissioner of  Insurance of  Puerto Rico

PRDA Puerto Rico Department of  Agriculture

PRDE Puerto Rico Department of  Education

PRDF Puerto Rico Department of  the Family

PRDHe Puerto Rico Department of  Health

PRDHo Puerto Rico Department of  Housing

PRDOJ Puerto Rico Department of  Justice

ODSEC, by its Spanish acronym Puerto Rico Office for 
Community and Socioeconomic Development

OMB Puerto Rico Office of  Management and Budget

OPPEA, by its Spanish acronym Puerto Rico 
Governor’s Office for Elderly Affairs

PRDPS Puerto Rico Department of  Public Safety

PREC Puerto Rico Energy Commission

PREMA Puerto Rico Emergency Management Agency

PREPA Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority

OSTDS Onsite Sewage Treatment and Disposal Systems

PRFN Puerto Rico Funders Network

P3 Public-Private Partnership

PRHBA Puerto Rico Home Builders Association

PACE Property Assessed Clean Energy

PRHFA Puerto Rico Housing Finance Authority

PDM FEMA Pre-Disaster Mitigation Grant Program

PRHIA Puerto Rico Health Insurance Administration

PRHTA Puerto Rico Highways and Transportation Authority

SWMA Puerto Rico Solid Waste Management Authority

PRIDCO Puerto Rico Industrial Development Company

TIP Transportation Improvement Program

PRIFA Puerto Rico Infrastructure Finance Authority

TRB Puerto Rico Telecommunications Regulatory Board

PRITA Puerto Rico Integrated Transit Authority

U.S. Army United States Department of  the Army

PRMA Puerto Rico Manufacturers Association

UPR University of  Puerto Rico

PRPA Puerto Rico Ports Authority

PRPB Puerto Rico Planning Board

URA Puerto Rico United Retailers Association

USAC Universal Service Administrative Company

PRPBA Puerto Rico Public Buildings Authority

USACE United States Army Corps of  Engineers

PRPS Puerto Rican Planning Society

USDA United States Department of  Agriculture

PRTC Puerto Rico Tourism Company

USDOC United States Department of  Commerce

PRTD Puerto Rico Treasury Department

USDOED United States Department of  Education

PRTEC Puerto Rico Trade and Export Company

USDOL United States Department of  Labor

PSHSB Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau

USDOT United States Department of  Transportation

QCEW Quarterly Census of  Employment and Ways

USF Universal Service Fund

RFP Request for Proposal

USFS United States Forest Service

RISE Resiliency Innovations for a Stronger Economy

USFWS United States Fish and Wildlife Service

RPS Renewable Portfolio Standard

USGS United States Geological Survey

SAIDI System Average Interruption Duration Index

WIOA Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act

SAIFI System Average Interruption Frequency Index

WPSs Water Pump Stations

SBA Small Business Administration

WTPs Water Treatment Plants

SMEs Small and Midsize Enterprises

WWPSs Wastewater Pump Stations

SOPs Standard Operating Procedures

WWTPs Wastewater Treatment Plants

SSI Supplemental Security Income

San Juan, PR. AI R

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION

INTRODUCTION 

01

San Juan, PR. Cristina A. Fawaz López

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSIONHurricanes Irma and María struck Puerto Rico on September 2017 and 
caused nearly complete devastation to the Island. On September 6th, 
Hurricane Irma — a category five storm — skirted the northern part of the 
island, causing significant flooding and leaving more than 1 million people 
without power1. Two weeks later, on September 20th, Hurricane María 
passed east-to-west across the entire Island. Hurricane María caused a 
complete loss of power, and it damaged thousands of housing units, as 
well as telecommunication towers, roads, bridges, schools, and 80% of the 
Island’s crop value2. Furthermore, Hurricane María impacted the structural 
integrity of all hospitals and health clinics, affected 70% of Puerto Rico’s 
potable water treatment and distribution system3, and caused immense 
suffering to nearly everyone in the Island. The Government of Puerto Rico’s 
damage assessment estimated that the Island would need $94.4 billion 
to recover fully4. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
(NOAA) estimates the damage from María makes it the third costliest 
hurricane in U.S. history, after Katrina (2005) and Harvey (2017)5. 

The severity of the impacts highlighted the 
Island’s physical and natural infrastructure 
vulnerability to extreme weather events 
and the need to better prepare for future 
events.  The  hurricanes  also  exposed 
structural socioeconomic weaknesses that 
existed before the storms and that were 
exacerbated as a result. Such weaknesses 
include  a  contracting  economy,  a 
bankrupt public sector, declining jobs, 
high inequality, aging infrastructure and 
continuous population loss. 

The combination of these physical, natural, 
and socioeconomic factors tested Puerto 
Rico’s resilience. Resilience is the capacity 
to respond, survive, adapt, and grow in 
response to shocks and stresses. Shocks 
are major crisis events that disrupt the 
normal operation of communities, as well 
as their institutions and systems. On the 
other hand, stresses are chronic conditions 
that progressively reduce the ability of  
individuals, businesses, institutions, and 
systems to function effectively.

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT21INTRODUCTIONRESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION

Even in the midst of all 
this turmoil, Puerto Ricans 
are clear on one thing: 
The path forward is not 
to return the Island to its 
prior state, normality is 
not the goal. 

Even in the midst of all this turmoil, Puerto 
Ricans are clear on one thing: The path forward 
is not to return the Island to its prior state, 
normality is not the goal. 

The story of the new Puerto Rico is yet to be 
written. The Island must use this catastrophe 
to leverage the investments that will be made to 
change its growth and development trajectory. 
The recovery process should not focus only on 
replacing outdated infrastructure. Instead, it 

should aim at building better assets, unleashing 
innovation, and coordinating among interested 
stakeholders. By creating these conditions, we 
will pave the path to address multiple challenges, 
increase social cohesion, strengthen the economy, 
and eliminate existing underlying socioeconomic 
weaknesses. Only then, Puerto Rico will be a 
better place for its citizens. The above is the vision 
of the Resilient Puerto Rico Advisory Commission 
and its core project, ReImagina Puerto Rico.

San Juan, PR. Han Kim

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSIONAbout the Resilient Puerto Rico 
Advisory Commission

The Resilient Puerto Rico Advisory Commission (the “Commission”) was created in November 2017 
as an independent, inclusive, non-partisan, non-governmental body led by Puerto Ricans. It was 
designed to serve as a unifying force among a diverse group of voices. The Commission receives no 
public funding. It is financially supported entirely by Ford Foundation, Open Society Foundations, 
and The Rockefeller Foundation, with technical support from The Rockefeller Foundation’s 100 
Resilient Cities, as part of a broad effort to support the resilient recovery of Puerto Rico.

The Commission

5

Co-Chairs 

22

Commissioners 

The Co-Chairs lead the Commission. They 
are leaders from Puerto Rican civil society and 
professional communities that represent diverse 
interests and social sectors. They were selected 
in consultation with local groups to lead the 
effort and evaluate, endorse, and approve the 
overarching recommendations of this report.

Commissioners are civic, community, and business leaders 
appointed  by  the  Co-Chairs.  They  represent  a  broad 
cross-section of  NGOs, academic, civic, and professional 
communities  in  Puerto  Rico.  They  are  the  project’s 
ambassadors, an integral part of the community engagement, 
and have contributed their knowledge and technical expertise 
to the development of this report’s recommendations.

(Appendix  A  contains  a  list  of   the  Co-Chairs, 
Commissioners, and Secretariat of the Commission.) 

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT23INTRODUCTIONGoal

The Commission’s goal is to promote a stronger, more resilient Puerto 
Rico as it embarks on reimagining its development and reconstruction 
processes. These processes must include more public participation  
and transparency, where the people of Puerto Rico take an active role 
in forging the vision of the Island. 

Objective

The Commission’s core project, ReImagina Puerto Rico, aims to 
produce an actionable and timely set of recommendations for how 
to use philanthropic, local government, and federal recovery funds 
to help rebuild Puerto Rico in a way that makes the Island stronger 
– physically, economically, and socially – and better prepared to 
confront future challenges. 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION24INTRODUCTION

ReImagina Puerto Rico divided the work 
into six working groups: 

Housing

Energy

Physical  
Infrastructure

Health, Education 
& Social Services

Economic  
Development

Natural  

Infrastructure

San Juan, PR. Cristina A. Fawaz López

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT

Each working group met on three different occasions. 
They included Commissioners and other experts and 
stakeholders with extensive knowledge and experience 
in the focus of each of the working groups. 

One of the central distinctions of this effort lies in the 
broad and participatory outreach process it has instilled 
toward Puerto Rico’s recovery and reconstruction. The 
Commission has placed a primary focus on facilitating 
a conversation among a diverse collection of  voices 

to build consensus while looking for opportunities to 
embed resilience in the rebuilding efforts. As part of  
the outreach process, ReImagina Puerto Rico brought 
together schoolchildren and reached out to community 
members and leaders, community organizations, business 
leaders, government officials, and representatives from 
professional organizations, among other key actors. Also, 
it provided a common platform to discuss concerns and 
aspirations toward a more resilient Puerto Rico.

Puerto Rico's Resilience Challenge:  
Shocks and Stresses

Resilience describes the capacity of  communities to 
organize themselves and function so that the people 
living and working in those communities – particularly 
the poor and vulnerable – can survive, adapt, and thrive 
no matter what shocks or stresses they encounter6. 
Therefore, it is vital to analyze Puerto Rico’s shocks 
and stresses and their interdependencies. 

Hurricanes Irma and María were only the latest in a 
series of  major events that have severely affected Puerto 
Rico over the last decade. The Island has faced multiple 
environmental and socioeconomic shocks that have 
tested its capacity and affected its ability to respond in 
the past. Tropical cyclones, floods, and wildfires have 
been common occurrences in its roughly 3,515 square 
miles. Between 1998 and 2017 the Governor of  Puerto 
Rico has recognized over 45 emergency and disaster 
declarations associated with these shocks7. 

Additionally,  the  Island’s  economy  has  been 
suffering a staggering economic contraction for more 
than  10  years.  Outward  migration  and  changing 
demographic patterns have resulted in reductions in 
the Island's overall population8 and an increase in the 
elderly and in the population living below poverty 

levels. Over 41% of  Puerto Rico's inhabitants are 
living below the U.S. federal poverty line, which is 
proportionally more than triple the U.S. average 
(11%)9. Puerto Rico’s GINI coefficient – an indicator 
that denotes income inequalities across populations 
– is the highest in the United States10. 

Moreover,  in  May  2017,  a  fiscal  crisis  that 
developed  over  decades  spurred  a  bankruptcy 
declaration by the Government of  Puerto Rico and 
several of  its public corporations. The bankruptcy 
declaration12 prompted a process to start restructuring 
Puerto Rico's debt obligations, placing additional 
challenges on the Island’s public-sector operations 
and services. As such, any recovery measure that 
requires changes to the budget of  local government 
agencies (from either revenues or expenditures), 
could be subject to additional restrictions by the 
U.S. Federal Court and the Financial Oversight 
and Management Board for Puerto Rico. All these 
factors constitute stresses affecting Puerto Rico, 
and they create additional challenges to the overall 
management of  local government agencies and their 
policy implementation processes.

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION26F1

Socioeconomic disparities in Puerto Rico11

41.2%

Families under 
poverty level

U.S. 11.0%

$19,606

Median household 

income

U.S. $55,322

24.2%

18 years or older
population with no
high school diploma

0.54

Highest GINI 

coefficient within 

the U.S.

U.S. 11.0%

U.S. 0.48

12

The  bankruptcy,  which  was 
made possible under Title III of  
PROMESA  Law  and  enacted 
by Congress on June 30, 2016, 
allowed  the  U.S.  Congress  to 
impose a seven-member Financial 
Oversight  and  Management 
Board (FOMB) to deal with the 
Puerto Rico crisis. The President 
of  the United States appointed 
seven members to the Board and 
the  Governor  of   Puerto  Rico 
designated one ex officio member. 
https://juntasupervision.pr.gov/
index.php/en/home/

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT27INTRODUCTIONRESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION

Throughout the ReImagina Puerto Rico project's working group 
meetings and community outreach efforts, the following shocks and 
stresses, which are affecting Puerto Rico, were identified:

Shocks

Hurricanes and tropical 
storms

Epidemics 

Earthquakes and 
tsunamis

Floods

Heatwaves

Landslides and ground 
subsidence

Failure of health, 
communication, energy, 
fuel, water, and food 
distribution systems

San Juan, PR. Elías Núñez

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSIONStresses

Urban deforestation 
and poor access to 
green spaces

Obsolete, deteriorated, 
and aging infrastructure

Increased energy production cost

Improper use of the land

Lack of fiscal independence

Vulnerable populations in 
high-risk areas

Inability to pay mortgages 
and foreclosures

Discrimination (gender, race, 
sexual orientation, homelessness)

Poor access to mental health 
and preventive and medical 
treatment services

Lack of available safe and 
affordable housing

Migration of health 
professionals

Sea level rise

Limited government 
resources to meet essential 
needs and services

Personal debt and increase 
in cost of living

Violence and crime

School closures

Ownership and tenure matters

Lack of municipal and other 
organizations' participation in 
decision making

Economic depression

Losses of employment and closures 
of companies; unemployment and 
underemployment

Aging of the population and social 
insecurity for the retired

Lack of preparation of individuals, 
communities, organizations, and the 
government before extreme events

Drought

Loss of home and 
personal property

Coastal and riverine erosion

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT29INTRODUCTIONRESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION

When Hurricanes Irma and María struck the Island, the 
destruction – and the situation that has developed since 
then – was not just about the hurricanes. It was also about 
inequality, problems of aging infrastructure, a contracting 
economy, poverty, unemployment, immigration, lack of  
empowerment of  social communities, and a debilitated 
social fabric. All of  these factors increased vulnerability, 
undermined Puerto Rico’s resilience, and played an 
important role in the Island’s capacity to respond and 
recover from the hurricanes. 

For instance, the high poverty rate in Puerto Rico 
and the lack of  affordable housing have contributed to 
the inappropriate use of  land, the increase of  vulnerable 
populations that have settled in high-risk areas, and the 
increase of informal housing in general. The government 
agencies did not have an updated cadaster, and were 
therefore limited to rapidly and accurately assess the 
damages. Due to ownership and tenure rights, this 
already vulnerable population will experience increased 
difficulties in accessing available resources for home 

repairs, which will, in turn, exacerbate poverty and 
vulnerability. 

Puerto Rico' infrastructure was brittle, outdated, 
and not properly maintained before the hurricanes. 
This was due to  the government's limited resources for 
capital investment. Also, the economic decline had led 
to the migration of  professionals to the U.S. mainland, 
especially in the health and education sectors. The 
government’s damage assessment, performed after the 
impact of  the hurricanes, indicated that each of  the 68 
hospitals and 107 health clinics experienced significant 
structural  damages  and  power  loss.  Parts  of   the 
primary and critical care network had to close because 
of  structural damages. There was a lack of  reliable 
backup energy sources and of  sufficient personnel and 
equipment. Combined with the tainted water supply 
and the widespread lack of  reliable energy sources, 
this situation affected the population suffering from 
chronic diseases and represented a health crisis whose 
consequences will take years to manifest and fully assess. 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION30INTRODUCTION

Lares, PR. Agustin Montanez

The Complex Landscape of
Relief and Recovery Efforts

Immediately after the hurricanes – and since then – 
a wide array of  organizations stepped up to support 
immediate disaster response and initial recovery actions. 
Among  these,  the  non-governmental  organizations 
(NGOs), community-based organizations (CBOs) and 
public schools (especially those in remote rural areas), 
as well as the local and federal government agencies, 
have played an instrumental role. Appendix B presents 
a glimpse of  the vast array and complexity of  recovery 
efforts led by NGOs, the federal government, and Puerto 
Rico government agencies.

The NGOs, CBOs and public schools all throughout 
the Island have been widely recognized for taking the 
lead in the immediate response efforts. They were first 
responders and, in many instances, the only ones13. 
NGOs and public schools were flexible and innovative. 
They took on new roles, created distribution centers, 
provided medical aid, collected information on damages 

and vulnerable populations, established partnerships, 
mobilized resources (they produced more than 100 relief  
funds). In the process, they became strategic actors in the 
relief activities.

As public and private institutions continue to move 
forward, their involvement in recovery and reconstruction 
agendas presents a unique opportunity to strengthen 
Puerto Rico’s infrastructure, processes, institutions, and 
communities in preparation for future shocks and to 
reduce  day-to-day  stresses.  The  government  should 
leverage the work of the NGO sector and public schools. 
An organized, strengthened, and empowered nonprofit 
sector, in alliance with public school communities across 
the Island, will and should have an important role in the 
resilient reconstruction of Puerto Rico. They are close to 
the communities which give them invaluable knowledge 
regarding their needs, they have credibility, and they can 
act effectively and quickly. 

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT31INTRODUCTIONCommunity Voices 
and Unmet Needs

Gathering public input was a main concern for ReImagina Puerto Rico. As part of the work, there 
was a broad and inclusive outreach engagement process (see Section III). Throughout this process, 
participants from all over the Island described and discussed their primary concerns and unmet 
needs as a consequence of Hurricanes Irma and María.

Limited financial capacity of local and 
Government of Puerto Rico institutions
One of the main unmet needs identified throughout this process focuses on the limited 
fiscal and financial capacities of public sector institutions and individuals to fund recovery 
actions14. Puerto Rico’s limited budgetary capacity to engage in the reconstruction of  
critical infrastructure and the provision of essential services requires greater financial 
assistance from the federal government and philanthropic organizations15.

Delerict energy, water, transport, facilities, and 
telecommunication infrastructure systems
The need to address the derelict conditions of Puerto Rico’s infrastructure emerged as one 
of the most essential across the Island after the hurricanes. There is a need for stronger and 
reliable protection against multiple shocks, particularly hurricanes, flooding and sea level 
rise impacts, for housing and critical infrastructure. 

Limited health services, particularly mental health
A salient need discussed with community groups and technical experts was access to health 
services, particularly mental health. There have been many cases of human trauma after 
the hurricane, yet there is a great lack of access to mental health services (see Health, 
Education & Social Services Sector Report, Appendix C). The prevalence of mental 
health issues, high demand for these services, and lack of adequate medical attention is 
an ongoing stress for communities. 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION32Disrupted education services
The aftermath of  Hurricanes Irma and María severely disrupted the provision of  
education services. The use of  schools as temporary shelters and a centralized school 
inspection process limited the prompt reopening of  schools across Puerto Rico. The 
inefficiency of  this process disrupted Puerto Rico's public education system for about 
eight weeks and the public higher education system at the University of  Puerto Rico 
for over two months. Communities are worried about schools' infrastructure and the 
quality of  the education. The consequences of  the disruption of  schools' academic 
calendars, the potential closure of  schools, the absence of  school personnel and 
communities in decision-making processes, and the growing migration of  teachers 
undermine the state of  education in Puerto Rico.

Limited enforcement of land use planning and building codes

Inadequate  land  use  planning,  implementation,  and  enforcement  of   existing 
development policies were also a limitation to the autonomous recovery of  Puerto 
Rican families. Existing properties constructed along vulnerable areas prone to 
flooding, landslides, and high wind impacts, as well as with structurally insufficient 
construction, contributed to the loss of  homes and buildings. Given the severity of  
the hurricanes' impacts on household structures, it is evident that laxity in land use 
zoning and permitting processes along vulnerable areas and in the structural safety 
of  constructions is a major issue for communities. These conditions have exacerbated 
social insecurity and further limited the access to safe and affordable housing. 

Limited access to safe and affordable housing

People living in high-risk areas (prone to flooding, landslides, and wind impacts) 
were greatly affected due to the destruction of  their homes. They often do 
not have access to federal funds, lack resources to relocate, and are unable to 
reconstruct or retrofit their housing units to withstand and overcome these shocks. 
Given the predominance of  families living in informal housing and in high-risk 
areas, the inability to take action is a great concern and it has led vulnerable 
populations to feel unprotected and at risk. 

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT33INTRODUCTIONIncreased social insecurity and inequality

Many communities across Puerto Rico were almost entirely inaccessible for weeks 
due to collapsed roads and bridges, landslides, and strewn vegetation that blocked 
many roads. Due to the lack of  secure structures and access to transportation, in 
addition to vandalism and robbery after Hurricane María, people began to feel 
insecure in their communities. Additionally, heavy rains and sea swells continued 
to batter vulnerable populations in the hurricane's subsequent months, causing 
families to still be afraid of  losing their homes and belongings. As a result, there 
has been significant displacement, and the economic and social impacts are not 
fully known but will manifest in the long term. 

Lack of communication and coordination

The lack of  communication and coordination between individuals, organizations, 
the media, and government officials is a core unmet need that needs to be 
addressed in order to overcome response and recovery challenges. Understanding 
individuals' and communities' needs is also critical in order to overcome these 
aforementioned challenges. As a result of  the hurricane's aftermath, communities 
and organizations in all sectors of  Puerto Rico consistently identified and 
recognized limited access to trustworthy information, efficient communication, 
and island-wide coordination. These limitations caused a sentiment of  uncertainty 
and vulnerability that translated in challenges to cope with hazards, accelerate 
recovery, and minimize loss to life and damage to property and the environment. 

The  impacts,  challenges,  and  unmet  needs 
exacerbated by Hurricanes Irma and María offer a 
unique opportunity to adapt the Island’s challenging 
path  and  steer  a  new  course  toward  a  stronger, 
equitable and transparent recovery process. Meeting 
the fundamental needs of  the community is the first 
step in building long-term resilience. By addressing 

the most fundamental challenges, Puerto Rico will 
recover and evolve to be stronger and better prepared 
to face any problems that come its way. Recognizing 
the multiplicity of  challenges and unmet needs, the 
Commission established an engagement process to 
identify a set of  actions to help Puerto Rico recover 
more resiliently.

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION34INTRODUCTION

A Pathway from Relief to 
Resilience: Lessons from 
Hurricanes Katrina and Sandy 

One of the qualities of resilient systems is the capacity 
to be reflective and use past experiences to inform future 
decisions16. Post-disaster recovery efforts from Hurricanes 
Sandy and Katrina bring many valuable lessons at this moment 
of Puerto Rico’s history. We will highlight four of them:

1

Climate Change: Resilience 
and Long-term Impacts

One of the first and main lessons lies in the importance of explicitly acknowledging the 
potential long-term impacts of climate change and highlighting and embedding resilience into 
all post-disaster recovery actions. The Unified New Orleans Plan17, the New York State 2100 
Commission Report18, and the Hurricane Sandy Rebuilding Strategy19 all recognize the need to 
incorporate resilient solutions to the threat of climate change impacts as part of their actions. 
These components are particularly necessary to cope with the effects of sea level rise and more 
frequent and severe weather events, which in Puerto Rico also include changes in precipitation 
patterns and stronger hurricanes forming along the Atlantic Basin. As Puerto Rico rebuilds its 
infrastructure, it must incorporate resilience considerations in all actions to ensure preparedness 
for future disasters, reduce future costs, and improve the overall quality of life for Puerto Ricans. 

Santa Isabel, PR. Angel Xavier Viera-Vargas

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION

2

3

Inclusive Recovery

A second lesson is that to be able to rebuild stronger and more resiliently, the recovery needs 
to be inclusive. It is necessary to provide strong support to local leaders and community-based 
recovery efforts, particularly to non-governmental organizations. Empowering local philanthropic 
organizations proved successful in supporting effective actions in the aftermath of Hurricane 
Katrina. The combined efforts of The Rockefeller Foundation and the Greater New Orleans 
Foundation were instrumental in the creation of the Unified New Orleans Plan, the guiding 
planning instrument for the recovery and reconstruction of the city. Also, Ford Foundation 
provided substantial support to the creation of the Louisiana Disaster Recovery Foundation 
to “provide resources for the relief, recovery, and betterment of Louisiana’s people and 
communities.... (and to) support nonprofit organizations engaged in economic development, 
housing, land use planning, education, and healthcare”20. Given the strong performance 
and credibility of the NGO sector in Puerto Rico, serious considerations should be taken to 
strengthen them and include them as leading actors in the long-term rebuild. 

Nature-based Solutions

A third lesson from the recovery efforts is to provide greater emphasis on the development of 
nature-based solutions and green infrastructure as part of an overall resilience strategy. Green 
infrastructure became an explicit recovery strategy of the federal government, as outlined in 
the Hurricane Sandy Rebuilding Strategy report. As part of recovery actions after Hurricane 
Sandy, several initiatives included green infrastructure projects, such as a coastal defense 
project in Jamaica Bay, Queens (NY) that harnesses wetland restoration to protect and restore 
its coastal zone. Also, hybrid projects that combine both green and grey infrastructure are 
currently being explored and undertaken across the country. Many of the actions presented 
in this report include these considerations. Decision makers in Puerto Rico should focus on 
adequately capturing the value and benefits of green infrastructure and environmental factors 
when defining infrastructure investments.

Santa Isabel, PR. Angel Xavier Viera-Vargas

INTRODUCTION

4 Finally, one of the most important lessons arising from the catastrophes was the need for 

Investments for 
Long-term Recovery

a system of transparent, coordinated, and aligned investments for long-term recovery. 
Although philanthropic funders, individual donors, and community-based lenders emerged 
to support the Gulf region, in New Orleans in particular, confidence was lacking about the 
capacity of local organizations to absorb and allocate funding transparently. Donors also 
worried about partnering with local government agencies and institutions due to pre-storm 
conditions of mismanagement and even corruption. Further compounding this challenge was 
an inability to coordinate and align the money — no one seemed to know who was doing 
what and how it cohered into a strategic recovery effort. Because of this, two important 
concurrent efforts emerged. One of them was the establishment of the Louisiana Recovery 
Authority (with professional staff guided by a volunteer citizen-led board) as the single point 
for federal funds budgeting and programming. The other one was the development of the 
Community Support Organization, housed at the Greater New Orleans Foundation, which 
supported the development of the Unified New Orleans Plan recovery strategy. The region 
and city suffered for a limited period, until these efforts began, because of the perception 
that investing in New Orleans’ future was unwise. 

The creation of the Louisiana Recovery Authority (LRA) and its sister organization, the Louisiana 
Disaster Recovery Foundation (now the Foundation for Louisiana), as well as the establishment of 
the Community Revitalization Fund at the Greater New Orleans Foundation, significantly changed 
Louisiana's trajectory. The LRA was a government agency established to be a transparent and credible 
clearinghouse of programming and investments, to ensure the coordination of significant fiscal 
efforts, and to take a strategic point of view about how investments would enable the region to build 
back better and increase resilience. They also facilitated the braiding of federal recovery dollars with 
other public and private investment. The Louisiana Disaster Recovery Foundation (now Foundation 
for Louisiana) became an incredibly important intermediary for national philanthropy to invest in the 
recovery of families and a low-income lender to facilitate small business and community investment. 

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT

Finding a Path Toward a   
Resilient Puerto Rico

Building  resilience  requires  viewing  a  community 
holistically and understanding the systems that make 
up the place, as well as the interdependencies and 
risks through precise identification of  existing and 
potential shocks and stresses. Beyond continuing to 
build its capacity for resilience, Puerto Rico must 
take advantage of  the current moment to embark 
on a unified planning exercise that emanates from a 
series of  consultations and debates, with numerous 
stakeholders and at multiple scales. Such a planning 
exercise can strengthen Puerto Rico’s social fabric 
and devise and design a clearer set of  projects and 
programs to improve its development trajectory and 

the well-being of  its citizens. To help jumpstart the 
required planning efforts, ReImagina Puerto Rico has 
put forth specific and actionable recommendations that 
comprehensively, and in a coordinated manner, address 
unmet needs and ongoing challenges and mitigate the 
impact of  future disasters.

During the process adopted by ReImagina Puerto 
Rico, important recommendations surfaced which the 
Commission identified and developed, as described in 
greater detail in Section II. While there may be many 
paths to recovery, the Commission established a set 
of recommended principles to steer all chosen 
paths. These guiding recovery principles are: 

Maximize social well-being 
in all investments

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION38Given the extent of unmet needs and the fragile economic and fiscal situation of the Island, every recovery dollar spent should deliver positive social returns. As the recovery starts in full, decision-makers and investors should seek to maximize social well-being throughout all reconstruction efforts. This must be done explicitly across all investments in a way that not only improves resilience in Puerto Rico but also ensures social mobility and the just distribution of benefits.Establish equity and 
inclusiveness as a priority

Ensure transparency at all 
levels of policymaking

Emphasize and foster 
coordination and collaboration

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT39INTRODUCTIONIn this transformational moment, Puerto Rico must ensure its vulnerable population and all communities benefit from the recovery efforts. As we have presented throughout this report, the socioeconomic situation was difficult before the hurricanes. The hurricanes laid bare existing structural challenges and inequities. We have now the opportunity to address some of those disparities. Elements of participatory planning, design, budgeting, and decision-making should be incorporated in the path forward. The communities should be main actors in this process, and not passive recipients, to ensure these investments lead to equitable growth. The term “community” should be defined in a way that recognizes Puerto Rico as a migrant “crossroads” given that the Island has historically been a migrant-sending and -receiving country, and this migratory history has had a profound impact on our social, cultural, and political fabric.Accountability and transparency should be built-in to the ongoing process of recovery planning, implementation, and monitoring. Puerto Ricans should systematically and rigorously generate, as well as collect and update, data relevant to the recovery in order to make informed choices and determine if the investments are achieving their objectives and community goals. Strategies to improve data collection and ensure transparent dissemination can aid the delivery of existing programs, redirect funds when needed, encourage learning and innovation, and pilot new approaches.Coordination and collaboration among the multiple stakeholders involved in the rebuilding process can go a long way toward addressing the challenges presented by Puerto Rico’s complex governance and decision-making processes. Unnecessarily fragmented and disconnected systems lead to inefficiencies, redundancies, and gaps in addressing needs and providing services21. Open, conciliatory, and inclusive processes will generate better outcomes and increase the Island’s social and political stability.These strategies aim 
to leverage recovery 
funding to address 
interrelated unmet 
needs associated 
with socioeconomic 
distresses, economic 
constraints, and limited 
adaptive capacities.

El Yunque National Park, PR. Trish Hartmann

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSIONCrosscutting Strategies to  
Promote Recovery Principles 

The Commission identified six crosscutting 
strategies directed toward reaching the four 
recovery principles previously described and 
leveraging philanthropic, federal, and local 
disaster  recovery  funds.  These  strategies 
are  focused  on  addressing  interrelated 
unmet needs associated with socioeconomic 
distresses, economic constraints, and limited 

adaptive  capacities  identified  during  the 
ReImagina Puerto Rico engagement process. 
As an initial step to encourage a long-term 
vision for Puerto Rico, these strategies will 
foster  best  practices  in  the  recovery  and 
transformation process by attending unmet 
needs revealed by the passing of Hurricanes 
Irma and María.

1 Adopt a universal 

accessibility 
policy for the 
reconstruction 
efforts

Develop and implement a policy for all recovery and reconstruction 
efforts. This policy must center on accessibility regarding older 
adults, people with disabilities and others with access/functional 
needs in order to address current and future unmet needs for 
accessibility. This policy should stipulate that accessibility codes 
be applied in outreach processes, information and communication 
technologies, and basic infrastructure systems. Incorporating 
universal design principles into post-disaster situations with a 
long-term perspective is particularly important as it opens up 
opportunities for reconstructing infrastructure more inclusively. 

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT41INTRODUCTION2

Establish effective 
and equitable 
community 
participation

Design and execute unmet needs' identification assessments, allocation 
methods, and comprehensive recovery plans with inclusive participatory 
and collaborative processes with philanthropic, federal, and local disaster 
recovery funding opportunities. The rebuilding efforts and processes 
should be as close as possible to the people by establishing a procedural 
framework that incorporates participatory planning and decision-making 
processes. Municipalities will play a key role in establishing community 
engagement structures that are permanent and guided towards community 
participation, access to data, and understanding of the recovery processes. 
Identify groups with effective participatory models, and integrate them in 
the reconstruction efforts where reconstruction policies and actions have 
been determined and defined.

3

Implement 
evidence-based 
approaches to 
foster transparency 
and capacity 
building

Create a multi-sector advisory board to ensure evidence-based  design 
and prioritization of  projects and to enable knowledge transfer 
between municipalities, nonprofit organizations, community groups, 
public schools’ personnel, academia and the private sector. This 
board would guide federal and local government officials through 
the design of  multiple-benefit frameworks to develop, prioritize, 
and monitor evidence-based recommendations. It will also provide 
them with technical assistance in the dissemination of information to 
municipalities, community organizations, and nonprofit organizations.

4

Promote 
innovation in 
reconstruction 
efforts

Prompt  and  strengthen  the  capabilities  of   innovation  labs  to 
trigger  new  and  refined  products,  services,  and  models  that 
address unmet needs more effectively. Fostering innovative design 
and implementation in the reconstruction efforts will enable the 
development of  novel social solutions (such as growth in jobs and 
sharing of  information), technical approaches (such as technologies, 
types of  construction, and flood control systems), and institutional 
advances and best practices (such as procurements, monitoring, 
transparency, and knowledge transfer). The innovation labs should 
be composed of  multi-sector, cross-functional teams that include the 
government, academia, nonprofit organizations, private businesses, 
and communities. At the most basic level, these teams will be 
responsible for performing research, networking, innovative solution 
competitions, and evaluating the impacts of  creative problem solving 
that attends a diverse spectrum of  stakeholders. 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION425

Develop resilient 
and empowered 
communities 

6

Integrate a resilience 
dividend in all 
investments

Support, develop, and implement place-based community 
resiliency plans, focused on disaster risk preparedness and 
strategies, that address community needs, aspirations, and 
integration. Support should be employed to create community 
engagement  structures  for  individuals  and  businesses  to 
work with professional planners and other multidisciplinary 
experts.  The  planning  process  should  stimulate  genuine 
community  involvement  and  empowerment  of   socially 
disadvantaged groups at all stages in the development of  
comprehensive and disaster management programs. This 
will  facilitate  capacity  building,  coordination,  and  trust, 
which are essential in reducing community vulnerability to 
natural disasters. Structures and plans should be built upon 
from the application of  knowledge, practices, and lessons 
learned by local communities after experiencing the impacts 
of  Hurricanes Irma and María. This strategy recognizes the 
valuable contribution of  empowered local communities and 
enables cooperation in all place-based planning programs.

Design planning processes, prioritization frameworks, and 
policies that integrate the resilience dividend and factor in 
a decision-making criterion to leverage recovery funds. The 
resilience dividend refers to the cost-savings, cost-avoidance, 
and  multiple  benefits  created  across  multiple  systems 
through resilience planning, projects, and practices. Given 
the immensity of  the unmet needs and the Island's fragile 
economic situation, every dollar spent is a precious investment. 
Individuals, decision-makers, and investors need to be explicit 
about maximizing the co-benefits of  all investments. All 
investments deployed in Puerto Rico should aim to contribute 
to its resilience by delivering multiple positive returns and 
serving communities in both the good times and the bad times.

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT43INTRODUCTIONRESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION

STRATEGIC 
RECOMMENDATIONS

02

Cayey, PR. Elías Núñez.

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION44Even though it is initially difficult to determine when the relief efforts 
stop and the recovery starts, there is a path that Puerto Rico will need 
to navigate wisely to take advantage of all the opportunities that arise. 
By strengthening the territory's underlying social fabric and better 
understanding the potential shocks and stresses it may face, Puerto 
Rico can improve its development trajectory and the well-being of its 
citizens. This report puts forth specific and actionable initiatives that 
comprehensively, and in a coordinated manner, address unmet needs 
and ongoing challenges and mitigate the impact of future disasters. 
The report presents findings organized in the following groups:

Sector Goals 

Priority 
Recommendations

Sector Specific Opportunity 
Recommendations

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS45REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTSector Goals 

Developing actionable items requires a clear definition 
of the scope and reach of the issues these initiatives will 
address. Such a definition promotes realistic expectations 
and avoids setting overambitious goals that ignore the 
current social, economic, and institutional landscape 
that defines Puerto Rico’s condition. As such, ReImagina 
Puerto Rico has set sector goals, which appear on the 
following page.

Arecibo, PR. Jeff Miller

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION46Housing

Develop  a  portfolio  of   strategies  that  reduce  risk  exposure,  foster  community 
empowerment, and address the diversity in socioeconomic conditions, housing types, 
and tenure in Puerto Rico.

Energy

Address Puerto Rico’s energy needs by transforming its electric power infrastructure 
into an affordable, reliable and innovative system, while reducing adverse impacts on 
human health and the environment.

Physical Infrastructure

Develop and maintain infrastructure systems that are accessible, integrated, flexible, and 
robust enough so they may sustain critical operations for the well-being of Puerto Ricans.

Health, Education & Social Services

Develop initiatives that ensure the provision of health, educational, and social services to 
reduce existing and future vulnerabilities, and chart a pathway toward improved equity 
and well-being, with more participation of the people in its definition and implementation.

Economic Development
Craft a diversified portfolio of  economic activities that augment Puerto Rico’s 
resiliency by enhancing existing capabilities, improving employment prospects, and 
reducing inequalities.

Natural Infrastructure
Improve human health and well-being, foster economic development, and reduce 
exposure to hazards, through the sustainable use of  Puerto Rico’s natural resources.

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS47REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTPriority
Recommendations

These  are  17  recommendations  that  have  been 
highlighted from the sector reports as being particularly 
crosscutting, valued by participants as high priority, 
actionable, and attending critical issues. Each of these 
recommendations addresses several of the challenges 
and unmet needs of Puerto Rico. In this sense, these are 
initiatives that impact the rebuilding of Puerto Rico and 
significantly strengthen the Island's resilience.

Cabo Rojo, PR. Raúl José

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION48Priority 
Recommendations 
Sheet Guideline

Priority Recommendation Number

Recommendation 

Sector

Potential Lead:  
Organization/Agency 
that could lead the 
execution of  the action

Potential Partners:  
Organizations/Agencies that 
could support the lead and be 
actively involved in executing 
the action

Potential Funders:  
Potential sources that 
could fund the action

Timeframe:  
Short term (within 12 months)
Medium term (1-5 years)
Long term (5+ years)

1

Potential Lead
Puerto Rico 
Department of 
Housing

Potential Partners
Puerto Rico 
Department of Justice 
Property Registry; 
FEMA; Legal Clinics at 
Law Schools in Puerto 
Rico; NGOs; CBOs

Potential Funders
CDBG-DR; 
Philanthropic funding

Timeframe 

Short and 
medium term

Develop feasible models to establish land tenure 
and community ownership in informal housing.

A great portion of  Puerto Rico’s housing stock is considered informal, where a 
significant portion lacks legal tenure in the form of  a land title, a certificate of  
occupancy, or both. Informality in the housing sector disproportionately exposes 
the Island’s most vulnerable citizens to natural hazard risks and reduces access to 
basic services. Also, in the aftermath of disasters like Hurricane María, residents 
are not able to benefit from mitigating measures, such as homeowners’ insurance 
and post-disaster FEMA funding. Given the diversity in form, history, location, 
and livelihoods across communities in informal settlements, there is no short-
term, one-shot solution to address tenure issues in Puerto Rico. Therefore, it is 
important to research, develop, and pilot feasible tenure models that can chart 
a pathway towards normalization, while avoiding any undue displacement. 

Key aspects of  such an effort include: 

Research and recommendations of  pathways to land tenure security in 
informal communities throughout Puerto Rico. 

Diversity  and  choice  in  tenure  options  and  housing  types  (e.g., 
cooperatives, community land trusts, among others).

Risk-informed  decision-making  regarding  securing  land  titles  for 
individuals and communities to ensure mitigation of  future damage. 

Changes to existing policies regarding household access to post-
disaster funding.

Policies to protect communities from displacement and promote access 
to affordable housing. 

Policies to reduce absentee ownership and blighted buildings.

Education and legal assistance to inform individuals of  their rights 
and options.

Description: General description 
of the recommendation

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS49REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT1

Potential Lead
Puerto Rico 
Department of 
Housing

Potential Partners
Puerto Rico 
Department of Justice 
Property Registry; 
FEMA; University 
of Puerto Rico Law 
School; NGOs; CBOs

Potential Funders
CDBG-DR; 
Philanthropic funding

Timeframe 

Short and 
medium term

Develop feasible models to establish land tenure 
and community ownership in informal housing.

A great portion of  Puerto Rico’s housing stock is considered informal, where a 
significant portion lacks legal tenure in the form of  a land title, a certificate of  
occupancy, or both. Informality in the housing sector disproportionately exposes 
the Island’s most vulnerable citizens to natural hazard risks and reduces access to 
basic services. Also, in the aftermath of disasters like Hurricane María, residents 
are not able to benefit from mitigating measures, such as homeowners’ insurance 
and post-disaster FEMA funding. Given the diversity in form, history, location, 
and livelihoods across communities in informal settlements, there is no short-
term, one-shot solution to address tenure issues in Puerto Rico. Therefore, it is 
important to research, develop, and pilot feasible tenure models that can chart 
a pathway towards normalization, while avoiding any undue displacement. 

Key aspects of  such an effort include: 

Research and recommendations of  pathways to land tenure security in 
informal communities throughout Puerto Rico. 

Diversity and choice in tenure options and housing types (e.g., cooperatives, 
community land trusts, among others).

Risk-informed  decision-making  regarding  securing  land  titles  for 
individuals and communities to ensure mitigation of  future damage. 

Changes to existing policies regarding household access to post-
disaster funding.

Policies to protect communities from displacement and promote access 
to affordable housing. 

Policies to reduce absentee ownership and blighted buildings.

Education and legal assistance to inform individuals of  their rights 
and options.

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION50Immediate Next Steps:

Confirm the roles of  initiative owners and contributing partners. Convene a kickoff 
workshop to design the initiative, including a phasing plan and site visits.

Identify pilot communities, including initial conversations with residents, local leaders, and 
government authorities, to understand the context and long-term vision for the community.

Initiate and document a research plan. 

Loíza, PR. Preston Keres

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS51REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT2

Potential Lead
Governor's Authorized 
Representative

Potential Partners
PREC; Electric utility and 
private stakeholders; 
Community groups; 
NGOs; Local health 
and human services 
providers; Resilient 
Power Puerto Rico; 
Siemens; RePowering; 
Rocky Mountain Institute

Potential Funders
HMGP; CDBG-DR; 
USDOC; U.S. Army; 
USDOED; HUD; Other 
federal funding under 
HR-1892

Timeframe 

Short term

Establish reliable and diversified backup energy 
systems for vulnerable individuals and critical 
facilities, such as hospitals, schools, and emergency 
shelters and services facilities.

Recovery funds should be used to identify energy depending individuals and define 
guidelines to adopt adequate technologies. Also, backup energy systems that are 
reliable and diversified should be installed in critical facilities, such as hospitals, 
schools, nursing homes, fire and police stations, water supply systems, wastewater 
treatment plants, fuel pumping and pressurization stations, cellular communications, 
community centers, and emergency shelters, among others. The electrical systems 
of these facilities should be hardened and made redundant in order to protect 
assets and systems against natural hazards and power system failures. These 
efforts would follow redundancy recommendations as contained in FEMA P-1019 
(September 2014). FEMA P-1019 promotes the concept of backup energy systems 
based on knowledge developed from Hurricane Sandy, and promotes the nonutility 
installation and operation of power generation for backup support.

In every community there are vulnerable individuals who rely on electricity 
for medical aid, treatments, climate control, and other essential health and safety 
supports. This initiative should give priority to enabling access to backup energy 
equipment for such vulnerable individuals, whether in critical facilities, in other 
locations, or by other means. Furthermore, critical facilities provide essential 
services and functions for survival, the continuation of public health and safety, 
and disaster recovery. These critical facilities rely on continuous electric service to 
ensure operation and services continuity. 

In the advent of  Hurricane María, the extensive failure of  power service, 
including insufficient backup power at the Island's over 50 hospitals, is an indication  
that hospitals are excellent candidates for backup power additions or enhancements. 
These enhancements should focus on the development of diversified energy backup 
systems, such as renewables and energy storage. To the extent legally allowed, and 
supported by a sound business case, installations and retrofits to secure continuous 
power supply may be linked with the establishment of microgrids for critical facilities 
together with adjacent properties and facilities. On a longer-term basis, backup and 
microgrid energy systems can be coordinated with external predictive systems to 
anticipate weather emergencies and potential extended outages. 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION52Action steps include:

Identify the designation of  all critical facilities with the relevant federal and local government 
departments. Similarly, the designation of ‘energy dependent individuals’ should be confirmed 
with relevant departments and services providers and the names and residences of such individuals 
should be identified. 

Organize and implement a full energy redundancy assessment of  the identified facilities and 
individuals. Participation and input from stakeholders will provide real-time and recent experience 
from facility managers and specific user populations regarding power needs and energy priorities. 

Establish an appropriate mechanism to allocate and provide financial access to backup system 
procurements, purchasing, and installations based on the mix of  facility types identified across 
the region and their different assessed needs. 

Fast-track demonstration projects should be prepared and implemented as early as possible for each 
of the different types of critical facilities and vulnerable population groups. These demonstrations 
can provide a basis for learning. They can also refine the approach to i) assessments or requirements, 
ii) evaluation and selection of  solutions/technology, iii) project planning, iv) procurement and 
installation, and v) facilities' management training, and vi) systems performance monitoring. The use 
of demonstration projects should support refinement of technology choices, processes, regulations, 
funding, and operational aspects of subsequent projects. 

Simultaneously, implementation teams can be organized for project leads (e.g., hospitals facilities 
managers, community center facilities managers, nursing home facilities managers, among others.) 
Each demonstration project can be used to train the relevant facility managers in each cohort, on 
which basis they can initiate assessments and project planning for their respective facilities.

Immediate Next Steps:

Confirm the roles of initiative owners and contributing partners. Convene a kickoff workshop to 
design the initiative, including a phasing plan and site visit to relevant existing pilot projects in the 
region.

Secure existing data on designated critical facilities and vulnerable individuals, confirm designations 
with relevant government departments and service providers, and establish a database of these to 
track the establishment and progress of projects in each facility or for each group.

Establish arrangements to make recovery funds available to all identified critical facilities across 
the region in order to plan and install reliable and diversified backup energy systems.

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS53REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT3

Potential Lead
Communities; 
Municipalities; 
Puerto Rico 
Department of Housing

Potential Partners
PRPB; HUD; 
FEMA; PSHSB; 911 
Administrators; FCC’s 
Public Safety Support 
Center; NGOs; PECES

Potential Funders
CDBG-DR; HMGP; 
Philanthropic 
funding; FCC; 
Telecommunication 
providers, including 
AT&T and Claro

Timeframe 

Medium term

Develop resilient community centers to improve 
the provision of services during emergencies and 
disaster relief.
Key locations that provide services to communities in municipalities across the 
Island could be adapted into resilient community centers. The key is to identify 
physical spaces providing communities with social, economic, health and 
education services that could be transformed into these aforementioned resilient 
community centers. These centers would provide multiple cross-sector benefits 
to the community, such as Pre-K, educational classes, and workforce training 
programs. These centers wouls also offer a space for disaster relief  services and 
ongoing provision of  resources for the community. 

During emergency response situations, the resilient community centers would 
serve as command hubs for communication with federal and local agencies. They 
would also offer digital communication services for communities and businesses 
with limited to no access. Additional services could include access to a digital 
lifeline (e.g., radio communication and a command center), provision of  water, 
information, and medical services. The resilient community centers should 
have redundant energy and water services, focused on renewable energy, rain 
harvesting, and community gardens. 

Activities include: 

Develop a quick assessment to identify potential pilot projects across 
the Island.

The aforementioned assessment could include existing community 
centers or rehabilitation of  existing structures (e.g., government or public 
buildings, such as schools). 

Select  potential  sites  based  on  communities  and  risk  assessments, 
and informed by evaluating data from the Federal Communications 
Commission’s Disaster Information Reporting System (DIRS). 

Design the centers based on community census to define geographic target 
areas, community profiles (e.g., elder people, children, people with special 
needs), adequate spaces for basic services, and community interests, such 
as types of  social services and recreation activities.

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION54Pilot the resilient community centers in public housing projects.

Resilient community centers could serve as testbeds for innovations on green 
building design geared toward resiliency strategies (for example, solar panels 
with battery storage, water capture and reuse, recyclable building materials, or 
5G hubs).

Immediate Next Steps:

Set up initial meetings with leads and partners to discuss project opportunities 
and define the roles of initiative owners and contributing partners.

Assess potential locations, community census, and prioritization of needs.

Establish a plan for implementation and monitoring, and develop 
a proposal with estimated costs and multipurpose co-benefits.

Convene a kickoff workshop to design the initiative, including a phasing 
plan and site visit to relevant existing pilot projects in the region.

Verify existing data on individuals, confirm designations with 
relevant government departments and service providers, and develop 
a database of the aforementioned data to track the establishment and 
progress of  projects in each facility or for each group.

Ensure that arrangements are established to make recovery funds 
available for the planning and installation of reliable and diversified 
backup systems (telecommunication, energy, water).

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS55REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT4

Potential Lead
Puerto Rico Public 
Buildings Authority

Potential Partners
PRIFA; PRDE; PRDHe; 
PREMA; PRDHo; NGOs; 
Puerto Rico Legislature; 
Public school teachers; 
FEMA; HHS; Private 
healthcare providers; 
Bechtel Corporation 
(for educational 
infrastructure); 
Thornton Tomasetti 
(for healthcare 
infrastructure); 100 
Resilient Cities' 
Platform Partners

Potential Funders
HMGP

Timeframe 

Medium and long term

Invest in improvements to the physical 
infrastructure of educational and healthcare 
facilities to improve the provision of services on a 
regular basis and in the face of multiple hazards.
This initiative will create a roadmap to direct investment in the improvement 
of  social infrastructure toward facilities whose failure or closure, in the event 
of  a disaster, would pose the greatest physical and social risk to users and 
communities. The initiative also proposes pilot retrofit projects for schools and 
hospitals with the objective of  scaling the approach across the full portfolio of  
social infrastructure.

While schools perform vital functions in educating youth, they also serve as 
critical hubs in communities. In the event of a disaster, school closures, due to 
damage or their use as emergency shelters, prevent children from returning to 
school, which, in turn, limits the ability of parents to return to work. There is a 
ripple effect on the recovery of society as a whole. Facilities and their associated 
infrastructure must be capable of withstanding the impact of natural disasters with 
limited or no damage in order to allow swift recovery of community functions. 

Recommended actions include the following:

Conduct a vulnerability assessment of  the Island’s school infrastructure 
portfolio, identify schools which are most vulnerable to hazards, and 
use this information for long-term mitigation planning. This activity 
should enable a systems approach to prioritize infrastructure investments 
informed by risk awareness. 

Improve the reliability of  critical infrastructure systems that support 
schools on a regular basis and in times of  emergency. This must include 
alternative energy, water harvesting and other innovative methods that 
reduce dependence on centralized systems.

Integrate passive design concepts into school buildings through building 
orientation, natural daylight, and cross ventilation in order to reduce 
energy needs and maximize student performance.

Limit impervious surfaces on school grounds to decrease runoff and 
increase rainwater absorption.

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION56Build and retrofit school facilities with locally-available materials, construction 
techniques, and labor to stimulate the local economy and reduce reliance on and 
cost of  foreign products. The design and construction of  these facilities should 
conform to the latest adopted building code.

Involve the community in the visioning, design and maintenance of schools.

Use schools as multi-purpose, cultural utilites that provide resources and services 
to the wider community. Such resources and utilities should include capacity 
building/re-training spaces for displaced adults, libraries, internet access, 
performance/art spaces, playgrounds, gardens, and meeting rooms, among other.

When schools are closed and no longer needed for education, consider using the 
infrastructure to build community resilience in other ways. These infrastructures 
could be used for housing, community centers, or emergency shelters, with the 
option to reinstate them as schools in the future if  needs change. 

Where schools are needed as emergency shelters, ensure that contingencies are 
implemented to ensure students can have access to and continue to receive education 
services after the emergency declaration has finalized.

This action can be strengthened through strategies that establish alliances with 
municipal governments, philanthropists, foundations, and the school community.  These 
alliances would enhance and improve the current overall condition of  schools.

The physical infrastructure of hospitals and healthcare clinics in Puerto Rico suffered 
structural damages and power losses as a result of the hurricanes, preventing the provision 
of critical healthcare services. The recovery process presents an opportunity to make 
improvements to the infrastructure that will benefit users on a regular basis. 

The following are key components of  the process that should be considered:

Develop and update a multi-hazard risk assessment for healthcare facilities. 

Compare the current expected performance of  each facility with its desired 
performance. Performance should be evaluated based on everyday operations 
and defined emergency scenarios. The comparisons should identify the physical 
building performance (e.g., acceptable levels of  structural and non-structural 
damage), the building services performance (e.g., water, power, communications 

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS57REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTneeds), operations (e.g., downtime, staffing), and other off-site considerations (e.g., 
access to the site, transportation, power grid). After identifying the gap, a cost-
benefit analysis should be carried out to identify the most cost-effective solutions.

Prioritize which healthcare facilities should be upgraded using this systems-
level assessment at a regional or Island-wide level, taking into account both cost 
to upgrade to desired performance level and criticality of  service/demand in 
emergency scenarios.

Provide for backup power, water, medical supplies, food, fuel for generators, and 
emergency vehicles and housing for key staff on site. 

Develop emergency plans, training, and operational procedures, factoring in 
roles and availability of  staff to complement physical infrastructure upgrades.

Leverage investment for improvements in the performance of healthcare facilities 
during emergency scenarios in order to enhance everyday performance and 
address deficiencies that existed before the hurricanes. For example, consider 
how modifications to strengthen the envelope of  buildings can be used to 
improve energy efficiency and thermal performance. Investigate options for 
distributed energy or Combined Heat Power/Cogeneration to provide reliable 
power, as well as reduced emissions and potential revenue generation. Study the 
use of  green infrastructure to mitigate flood risks and create more appealing 
environments for patients and staff.

Immediate Next Steps:

Confirm  partnerships  with  education  and  healthcare 
infrastructure owners.

Select pilot facilities for mitigation studies, conduct site visits, 
and begin scoping and data review based on the best available 
information from infrastructure damage assessments and 
hazard maps, in consultation with infrastructure owners.

Develop the evaluation criteria and a work plan for the creation 
of a roadmap to prioritize investments in school infrastructure.

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION585

Potential Lead
Puerto Rico Department 
of Economic Development 
and Commerce

Potential Partners
COR3; DOLHR; PRDE; 
Labor unions; Industry 
associations; Universities 
and vocational schools; 
Not-for-profit training 
organizations

Potential Funders
WIOA; EDA; HUD; 
Municipal and Puerto 
Rico Government 
budgets; Workforce 
investment boards 
 and intermediaries

Timeframe 

Short and medium term

Prioritize Workforce Innovation and Opportunity 
Act (WIOA) funding for training, re-training, and 
skills credentialing within priority industry clusters.

The recently passed Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) 
establishes guidance for how workforce training dollars will be invested in 
Puerto Rico. Ideally, these dollars will be aligned with priority industry clusters 
that have clear potential to grow.

The allocation of  WIOA funds should reflect the needs of  prioritized 
industry clusters. Doing so will support the career pathways of  individuals who 
have relevant employment experience and life skills but lack formal education 
or industry certifications in those clusters. Rapid assessments of workforce needs 
should be completed for priority clusters, considering both current reconstruction 
efforts and requirements for mid- and long-term cluster competitiveness and 
growth. Trade unions should work in these assessments with business groups and 
Puerto Rico agencies involved in the allocation of  WIOA funds. As proposed 
in the WIOA State Plan, a working group of  representatives from key existing 
and emerging industries, government departments, industry associations, and 
relevant labor unions should assist the State Board and local (regional) boards 
in the development of  sector strategies and related career pathways.

Immediate Next Steps:

Set up initial meetings with the Puerto Rico Department of  
Economic Development and Commerce, the Puerto Rico 
Central Office of Recovery, Reconstruction and Resilience, and 
potential partners from municipalities and the private sector.

Set the scope of  work with leaders and partners.

Push for policy implementation.

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS59REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT6

Update the Island’s digital land cadastre to include: 
use and occupancy of structures, land tenure data, 
housing characteristics in informal housing, and 
information on insurance coverage.

Potential Lead
Puerto Rico Municipal 
Revenue Collection 
Center

Potential Partners
PR Science Trust; 
PRPB; PRDHo; PMO; 
Municipalities; HUD; 
Institute of Statistics; 
100 Resilient Cities’ 
Platform Partners

Potential Funders
CDBG-DR

Timeframe 

Short and medium term

The first step towards a safer overall housing sector in Puerto Rico should be 
the  creation of  a centralized and accessible database that includes (1) land 
tenure, use, and form for the informal housing sector, (2) community assets, 
and (3) economic opportunity. This database would help ensure social stability, 
security, and equity. More specifically, the cadastre should include use and 
occupancy of  structures, inventories, and databases from the Department of  
Housing and its  proposed land title grant plan. It should also include data on 
characteristics and typologies of  informal housing (including, insured properties 
and exposure and vulnerability to floods, earthquakes, and landslides) collected 
through community-based projects. Additionally, this initiative would identify 
vacant properties and other existing building stock that are suitable for housing 
development, which will, in turn, help maintain affordability. It would also 
establish an evidence base that can be used for broad planning efforts that 
support resilience in the housing sector but also for physical infrastructure, 
natural infrastructure, and economic development.
      Informal housing includes unpermitted residential structures that the 
occupants may or may not own, tenure situations that are not formally recognized 
by the state, as well as structures built on land owned by a public entity or a third-
party private property owner. Informal structures disproportionately expose 
the island’s most vulnerable residents to natural hazard risks and limited access 
to basic services. In the event of  a disaster like Hurricane María, residents of  
informal structures are unable to benefit from mitigating measures, such as 
homeowners’ insurance and post-disaster FEMA funding. Due to a lack of  title, 
residents generally do not invest in risk reduction.
      The data collection and mapping initiative will be community-driven and 
piloted in a selected community with the intention of  scaling the approach 
to other locations. Data should be collected, digitized, integrated, shared, and 
regularly updated in a coordinated, transparent, and accessible way to create 
a trusted and accurate evidence base to inform decision-making related to 
reconstruction, mitigation, planning and future development. 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION60 Map layers could include the following content:

Natural hazards and risk characterization, such as wind, flooding (including 
long-term sea level rise), earthquakes, landslides, ecologically-sensitive areas, and 
risk-based estimates based on hazards and existing conditions (e.g., vulnerable 
population, occupancy, constructions).

Cadastre data, including land parcels, ownership, use, inventories from the 
Department of Housing and its proposed land title grant plan, and insurance data.

Structure data locations, occupancies, ownership, permitting, and typologies, such 
as vulnerabilities to wind and earthquake forces based on age, construction type, 
and number of  floors, to mention a few.

Unoccupied structures or land suitable for infill housing, including public land 
and potential brownfield sites.

Social  data,  including  demographics,  community  assets,  functions  and 
organizational structures, and access to jobs and economic opportunities. 

Immediate Next Steps:

Confirm roles of  initiative owners and contributing partners. 

Convene a kickoff workshop that includes a phasing plan and site 
visit to design the initiative.

Identify pilot communities. Set up initial conversations with 
residents, local leaders, and government authorities to understand 
the context and long-term vision for the community.

Begin initiative design, including data and mapping protocols, 
community engagement, and data collection strategies.

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS61REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTLoíza, PR. Preston Keres

Begin to aggregate existing data sources, including: 

Puerto Rico Land Use Plan maps, municipal 
land use plans maps, DNER environmental 
data maps, and integrated hazard 
assessment tools

Cadastral data available in the CRIM's 
Digital Cadastre Portal website

PRDHo data, including 610+ parcel 
communities and housing rehabilitation 
programs

Puerto Rico GIS portal

FEMA risk maps

New damage assessment data from FEMA 
and other organizations

Relevant data from the Tu Hogar Renace program

Socioeconomic  data  from  the  U.S.  Census 
Bureau,  American  Community  Survey,  and 
local  schools  of   architecture,  planning,  and 
community social work studies

Available insurance data

Other sources, including 100 Resilient Cities 
Platform Partners

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION627

Potential Lead
Puerto Rico Electric 
Power Authority

Potential Partners
TRB; Electrical conduit 
suppliers for Puerto Rico 
(e.g., American Wire 
Group, Underground 
Devices, Inc. and Gibson 
Stainless & Specialty, 
Inc.); FCC

Potential Funders
5G - franchise fee 
revenue; FCC's  
Universal Service Fund

Timeframe 

Short and medium term

Commission a study to support the deployment 
(underground and aerial) of a more resilient 
telecommunications infrastructure.

Before making capital investments in new infrastructure, a study should be 
commissioned to assess the best way to harden and protect the telecommunications 
and the energy transmission infrastructures. This study should include feasibility 
and cost-benefit of  establishing an underground utility conduit system versus 
hardening the aerial infrastructure. The Puerto Rico telecommunications 
network sustained complete failure as a result of  the hurricane.This was due to 
winds, wind-powered debris, falling tree limbs, and landslides.

Protecting the utility plants will make the network more resilient and mitigate 
shocks and stresses to the system. It is unlikely that any system can completely prevent 
outages, but a study would show which investments will have the best value. Deploying 
utilities in the underground conduit is generally more expensive than deploying on 
poles. Poles should be upgraded, and better attachment and maintenance procedures, 
like tree trimming, can mitigate against damage at a reduced cost. 

The risk of  future shocks and stresses impacting the utility plant is high. 
Therefore, a potential solution would be to move utility plants off aerial utility poles 
and into underground conduit. This solution must focus on building a redundant 
middle mile ring around the Island, along major highways.

Regarding implementation, direct burial conduit is a proven deployment 
practice, and the cost of deploying conduit, especially in conjunction with road 
work, can be cost-effective. Deploying a shared underground conduit bank for 
telecommunications and power cables, in a ring around the island, could help lay 
the foundation for this underground network in the near-term. In the long-term, it 
would potentially continue for utility infrastructure expansion.

Immediate Next Steps:

Set up meeting with leads and partners to discuss project opportunities 
and define roles of initiative owners and contributing partners.
Convene a kickoff workshop to design the study methodology, criteria, 
funding structure and set the scope of work with leads and partners.
Review existing data and establish a database platform for tracking 
the study's progress.

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS63REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT8

Potential Lead
Puerto Rico 
Department 
of Housing; United 
States Department of 
Housing and Urban 
Development

Potential Partners
Municipalities; HUD; 
GAR; FEMA; PRPB; 
PMO; DNER; NGOs

Potential Funders
HMGP; CDBG-DR; 
PDM; Repetitive Flood 
Claims Grant; EWP-FPE

Timeframe 

Medium and long term

Enforce open space determinations with programs/
guidelines for the dedication of lands to the 
creation of parks, green infrastructure projects, land 
conservation, or other adequate uses.

A program and guidelines should be developed to support the local and 
municipal governments to effectively promote the acquisition of  open spaces 
in private lands and properties in high hazard areas. Under FEMA’s Hazard 
Mitigation Grant Program, open spaces are areas perpetually dedicated to the 
conservation of  natural floodplain functions and restricted from any use or 
development that interferes with that purpose.

The  proposed  programs  and  guidelines  will  create  more  resilient 
communities and enhance communities’ aesthetics. They will also reduce 
spending on construction, maintenance of  infrastructure for flood control, 
and National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) payments for insurance 
claims. Overall, this action will reduce federal, local government, and 
municipal spending on emergency response. 

This program will define actions to demolish existing structures and 
maintain lands as open spaces for permanent public use and multiple benefits. 
Besides reducing the number of  individuals living in high hazard areas, 
these guidelines will: define land use requirements, establish processes for 
place-based projects, and promote multifunctional projects. Projects might 
create multifunction recreational parks, urban forests, and edible urban 
gardens, as well as restore dunes and wetlands and improve wildlife habitats 
while providing economic and social benefits. Projects might also include 
improvement of  stormwater management with flood storage/overflow areas. 
Additionally, the program will define requisites for the establishment of  
partnerships and collaborations with NGOs to develop and administer the 
determined open spaces. 

In Puerto Rico, high hazard areas impacted by Hurricane María and 
abandoned and deteriorated structures, should be prioritized. Structures 
and properties that have experienced repetitive losses based on the National 
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) should also be highlighted. The Puerto 
Rico Planning Board should maintain all the determined open spaces in 
overlay districts and include coordination requirements and monitoring 
systems in association with nonprofit organizations.

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION64Dorado, PR. Sushant Jadhav

Immediate Next Steps:

Set up initial meetings with the Puerto Rico Hazard 
Mitigation Officer, FEMA, potential non-governmental 
organizations,  and  municipalities  to  discuss  Hazard 
Mitigation  Grant  requirements  for  partnership  and 
potential pilot projects.

Perform an assessment of potential pilot projects, prioritization 
of needs, and community-based solutions.

Establish a plan for implementation and monitoring and 
develop a proposal with estimated costs and multipurpose 
co-benefits.

Design a database to track the establishment and progress of  
future projects.

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS65REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT9

Prepare a new Integrated Resource Plan (IRP), with 
public, community and private sector participation, 
to be used as the foundation for the energy sector 
transformation and which includes updated analysis 
and forecast of the demand base, aggressive 
renewable generation targets, and a risk-based 
analysis of the sector to strengthen utility oversight 
and operator decision making.

Potential Lead
Puerto Rico Energy 
Commission

Potential Partners
PREPA; DEDC; PRPB

Potential Funders
PREPA; PREC

There is an urgent need for an updated IRP that reflects the changes 
required in light of  the post-Hurricane María scenario. The IRP would 
be the guiding document for the transformational and any transactional 
processes in Puerto Rico’s energy sector, regarding the energy mix, grid 
structure and development, and demand management. 

The IRP should lay the basis for the incorporation of  distributed energy 
resources and microgrids into the system. To complement, the IRP effort, 
additional regulatory proceedings, such as the development of  additional 
performance metrics and key performance indicators (KPIs), are required 
to deeply transform Puerto Rico's energy system. KPIs should promote risk 
assessments and a risk-based framework that will promote the system's security 
against natural hazards by defining effective and efficient capital investment 
decisions, systematic processes and transparency in the decision-making process. 
A central priority is to shift to dispersed generation sources (“location diversity”) 
that foster greater use of  renewables, as well as various generation technologies 
that match the changing load profile in the near term and forecasted long-term 
planning, while progressively reducing fossil fuels. Monitoring and updating 
the IRP is also required. Current Puerto Rico statutory law requires a 20-year 
planning process that is overseen by the local independent regulator, PREC, and 
subjected to rigorous external review and public comments.

Timeframe 

Short term

Immediate Next Steps:

Follow-up on Puerto Rico Energy Commission's work for the 
development and preparation of an IRP.

Take part in public collaboration initiatives.

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION66San Juan, PR. South Atlantic Division (SAD) USACE

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS10

Potential Lead
Governor’s Authorized 
Representative

Potential Partners
PREMA; PRPB; FEMA; 
PREPA; PRASA; DTPW; 
PRPA; PRDHe; PRDE; 
Telecommunication 
providers

Potential Funders
HMGP; FCC; USDOT; 
DTPW; FEMA

Develop a master integrated Continuity of 
Operations Plan (COOP) for critical infrastructures 
and providers.

An integrated Continuity of  Operations Plan (COOP) should be developed to 
ensure continued operation of  the Island’s critical facilities and infrastructures. 
This would ensure that all private and government agency services are effectively 
communicating and following a master emergency response plan. It will also 
help minimize disruptions of essential services across the Island while supporting 
a quick recovery after an event. This thereby reduces the likelihood of economic 
hardships and maintains the health and well-being of  the population.

Following Hurricane María, emergency relief  resources for communities 
and businesses in Puerto Rico were often delayed due to the failure of  critical 
operations. This caused a cascading effect between different infrastructures, 
reducing the recovery capacity of  the Island. Disruptions in electricity and 
telecommunication services, as well as coordination between agencies and 
private actors, caused delays in emergency responsiveness and relief  efforts. 
Ensuring continued operations of  the Island’s critical infrastructure is essential 
to strengthen the capacity of  Puerto Rico to survive, adapt, and thrive after a 
disaster. For this reason, critical infrastructure must be able to withstand and 
rapidly recover from hazards affecting Puerto Rico. This recommendation 
will address the need to understand the role of  providers, recognize gaps in 
the delivery of  services (roads, bridges, ports, water and power providers, 
telecommunication companies, etc.), examine post-hurricane conditions, 
and analyze the interdependency of  critical infrastructure (for example how 
telecommunications and digital infrastructure play a role in facilitating the 
delivery of  services in post-disaster scenarios).

Timeframe 

Activities include:

Short and medium term

Assess and examine current critical infrastructure conditions and cross-
sector dependencies to develop protocols for coordination among federal, 
local entities, and private service providers. 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION68Identify and operationalize protocols to improve cross-coordination between the 
government and the private sector during emergency response efforts. This is to 
ensure the continuity of  essential services and the health and well-being of  the 
population during a disaster.

Design a COOP for immediate disaster coordination between agencies dealing with 
critical infrastructure and associated services, such as health, telecommunications, 
energy, transportation, and water. Align private business contingency plans and 
integrate them into the Puerto Rico Disaster Risk Mitigation Plan, as well as the 
Puerto Rico Emergency Operation Plan. 

Integrate a comprehensive assessment and asset management system focused on 
improving the condition of  assets, timely restoration of  essential services, and 
the provision of  reliable mobility.

Immediate Next Steps:

Convene and confirm potential initiative owners and 
contributing partners. 

Develop periodic meetings with local government 
and federal agencies, as well as with public and 
private providers, to define scope and priorities.

Review possible arrangements to make recovery funds 
available for the development of  a master COOP.

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS69REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT11

Potential Lead
Puerto Rico 
Department of Health

Potential Partners
PRPB; PRDF; 
Government 
organizations 
accountable for 
statistics and data; 
Private insurers and 
healthcare providers; 
Multisectoral Council 
on Health; FEMA; 
HHS; Municipalities; 
Universities; NGOs

Potential Funders
NIH; 
Philanthropic funds 

Timeframe 

Medium and long term

Improve data collection, management and 
dissemination to ensure information transparency, 
reliability, and access.
Accurate, accessible and reliable information has been identified as one of  the 
most important areas of opportunity in the wake of Hurricane María. Improving 
the way data is collected and managed can have a direct impact in supporting 
emergency preparedness and response actions within state, federal and municipal 
governments. In addition, the way the information is made available will have 
immense effects on how NGOs, communities, families, and individuals plan, 
prepare and respond to emergencies.

Improving data collection, management, and dissemination will enhance 
preparedness, emergency management, and disaster response. It will also support 
the Government of  Puerto Rico and its municipalities in engaging on a more 
robust and reflective long-term comprehensive planning, increased stakeholder 
engagement and trust, improve tax collections and revenue, and well-informed 
decision-making processes that will improve health care policies and provision, 
education, and all other executive branch duties. 

This action’s purpose is to use technology, data collection, and GIS mapping 
to assemble evidence of specific data in order to develop place-specific health and 
social service policies. Government entities with data collection, management, and 
dissemination responsibilities need to ensure strong emphasis is given to certain 
attributes that need to be in place to effectively implement this action. These are 
systems integration, criteria independence, and stakeholder engagement. In this 
context, activities that support the implementation of this action include:

Carry out an assessment of  data shortfalls that were revealed after 
Hurricane María.

Create and update a directory and a GIS geodatabase of all critical service 
provider resources, responders, and infrastructure. This should include 
location, a span of  service capacity and preparedness plan, which they 
must maintain to keep participating in the mapping.

Create a directory of all public and private healthcare sector resources, 
and responders, including where they are located and their emergency 
preparedness plan, which should be routinely updated. 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION70Train communities to gather, use and interpret information. This will strengthen 
the preparedness skills, while providing an active collaboration role to communities 
and civic sector. This active role may include identifying and filling data gaps such 
as locating vulnerable populations and risks.

Increase electronic health record adoption and telemedicine capabilities.

Ensure that any database that addresses health determinants includes behavioral 
and mental health care since these are closely related and should be treated 
comprehensively.

Carry out syndromic surveillance using reliable data sources. 

Ensure right-sizing of staff dedicated to the collection, maintenance, synthesis, and 
deployment of data in order to identify populations at risk and serve vulnerable 
populations during emergencies and non-emergencies.

Monitor and collect data to measure cost and effectiveness of  programs and 
services, including the cost of health insurance administration.

Identify potential technological investments and human resource investments for 
improved ability to make integrated data-driven decisions during normal times 
and emergencies.

Immediate Next Steps: 

Set up initial meetings with leads and partners to 
develop a data repository and discuss the project and 
methodological approach.

Engage in the process of  building a data repository, 
and  establish  mechanisms  to  provide  access  to 
information resulting from the data repository.

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS71REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT12

Potential Lead
Puerto Rico Aqueduct 
and Sewer Authority

Potential Partners
PREPA; DNER; EQB; 
EPA; FEMA; NGOs

Potential Funders
HMGP; EPA; USDA; 
PRDE; CDBG-DR

Timeframe 

Medium and long term

Develop a water efficiency program to improve 
water demand management through water 
conservation and use of alternative water sources.
Education and technical assistance programs should be designed and implemented 
to inform the public about the impact of water efficiency and conservation, in 
order to promote behavior change in the long run. The program will incentivize 
customers to notify the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority (PRASA) 
of leaks and damaged infrastructure to reduce losses in the distribution network 
and it will also incentivize them to notify the Puerto Rico Department of Natural 
and Environmental Resources (DNER) and the Environmental Quality Board 
(EQB) of any water contamination problems in their communities. In addition,  
guidance and incentives will be developed for the use of rainwater and greywater 
harvesting and other non-potable water sources. Water conservation is a critical 
element for enhancing the resilience of water systems and is proven to be the most 
economical and environmentally protective management tool for meeting water 
supply challenges. Water conservation and the enhanced use of alternative sources 
largely depend on public awareness and understanding, and incentives created. 
The action will minimize the vulnerability of  the island and improve the 
standard of living by not only allowing individuals, communities and businesses 
to meet their water demand during emergencies, but also in the face of climate 
change threats and diminishing water resources. It allows vulnerable communities 
to reduce their dependency on public water supply systems and to meet their basic 
needs in times of drought (rationing) or water supply system failures. Improved 
operation of water supply infrastructure and the reduction of technical losses will 
protect vulnerable water resources, enhance financial sustainability and promote 
efficient water use. Improved knowledge and sustainable behavior change will 
empower individuals and communities. The conservation of water protects the 
environment and ensures reduced water consumption supporting a fair and 
transparent allocation of water rights. 

Furthermore, the use of alternative water sources will add flexibility to the 
existing water infrastructure system. With more climate extremes expected in the 
future, freeing up water for users builds on innovative solutions catalyzing the 
marketplace for resilient innovations and technologies. It encourages regional 
thinking and collaboration, promotes cohesive communities and improves 
connectivity to meet the future water demand more effectively while avoiding 
unnecessary investment in large capital-intensive infrastructure. Reduced 
expenditures on household, community and municipality level will help households 
to meet their needs and improve their well-being. It will also help communities and 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION72municipalities to manage public finances better.

Action steps include:

Develop a comprehensive metering and operations improvement program for community water 
supplies to ensure payment is based on consumption, taking water use efficiency criteria into account.

Develop water balances for all community water supply schemes, Standard Operating Procedures 
(SOPs) to enhance performance and reduce losses, and action plans to control water loss.

Develop a water conservation program that contains an outline of conservation goals and objectives 
to use alternative sources. This should include reuse and reclaimed water opportunities, and demand 
forecast reflecting savings from efficiency program. Establish measurable conservation goals with all 
water service providers on the Island, which include public consultation and annual progress reports. 
Improve data collection and reporting on water consumption/use (annual and "seasonal variations" 
consumption) by customer class for all water systems and service providers on the Island.

Develop public outreach training activities with relevant stakeholders aiming at conveying water 
conservation, schools’ educational programs, industrial water consumption and bill format that provides 
customers with water efficiency measures.

Promote the EPA’s WaterSense Program to protect water resources by promoting water efficiency and 
enhancing the market for water-efficient products, programs, and practices.

Develop necessary regulation, permitting and guidelines procedures for alternative water systems 
(rainwater or greywater systems) to prevent possible contamination of the public water supply system.

Review existing building codes to mandate low use plumbing fixtures and develop a municipal water 
efficiency program to make public buildings more efficient by, e.g. retrofitting plumbing fixtures.

Develop and implement a training program for (community) water supply operators on how to operate 
the systems more efficiently and to minimize water loses within the distribution and treatment systems.

Immediate Next Steps: 

Confirm partnerships with PRASA, FEMA, 
and other possible collaborative partners to 
design educational programs and alternative 
water sources.

Develop the evaluation criteria and a work 
plan for the creation of a roadmap to prioritize 
investments in water infrastructure and 
alternative water resources.

Establish a plan for implementation 
and monitoring, and develop a proposal 
with estimated costs and multipurpose 
co-benefits.

Design a database platform to track the 
establishment and progress of the program.

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS73REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT13

Optimize healthcare financing to reduce the 
proportion of uninsured people and shortage of 
healthcare professionals, and improve quality, 
access, and continuity of healthcare provision in 
disaster-related emergencies.

Potential Lead
Puerto Rico 
Department of Health

Potential Partners
NGO coalitions; 
Multisector Council 
onHealth; PRHIA; 
HHS; FQHCs; PRPA; 
PRDE; 330 clinics; 
UPR Medical Sciences 
Campus

Potential Funders
CDBG-DR; 
HHS; USDOED

Timeframe 

Short and medium term

This action seeks to evaluate the financial sustainability of  the healthcare 
system, recognizing that the reduction of  the insured population and health 
services coverage should never be a goal of  healthcare systems. 

Federal financing of  the health care system is a major issue affecting both 
the delivery of  services and the economic stability of  Puerto Rico. In other U.S. 
jurisdictions, the federal government pays a fixed share of  costs based on the 
state’s relative per capita income, while the Island receives a fixed annual funding 
cap. The funding cap has been insufficient to cover needs, leaving Puerto Rico 
with a funding gap. Puerto Ricans are also ineligible for other federal health 
programs including Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefits. 

To that end this action will encompass the following: 

Conduct an actuarial and economic feasibility study, identifying necessary 
conditions to reduce the uninsured population, while achieving financial 
sustainability. This study must evaluate alternate scenarios for health 
financing reforms, such as Oregon, Massachusetts, and Colorado. Data 
collection and validation can be delegated to existing local entities, such as 
the Multisector Council on Health, whose purpose is to study and analyze 
healthcare financing and provision models.

Produce an estimate of  health care spending in PR to determine how 
current costs hinder economic development and out-of-pocket health 
care related expenses impose a burden on families.

The actuarial and economic feasibility study will contain a breakdown 
of  the overhead burden in health care expenses, such as administrative 
expenses, medical billing, marketing practices, and other non-health 
care related expenses. 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION74Embed a thorough Stakeholder Engagement Plan, consistent with several federal 
mandates such as State Medicaid Medical Care Advisory Committee (42 CFR 
431.12), the State Innovation Plan under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and state 
legislation such as Law 235-2015 that creates the Multisectoral Council on Health 
to provide advice to the Governor and Legislative Assembly on health policy issues.

A set of  initiatives can be pursued to address quality issues in the health care 
system, including:

Align any recovery work with the PR State Health Innovation Plan.

Enhance professional opportunities in order to improve access to quality of care 
by attracting and retaining qualified professionals 

Incorporate health and nutrition education into existing school curriculums as 
a part of healthcare delivery to help prevent and manage disease, as well as to 
involve communities on prevention and healthy lifestyles.

Create policies for implementing an evidence-based approach to healthcare 
provision across public healthcare facilities.
Expand coordination with hospitals, public health organizations, and health 
providers to address health disparities, prepare for disasters, and increase 
community wellness.

Establish a plan with ports and private shipping companies to manage supplies 
for health and other basic needs that can be deployed during emergencies.

Establish standard policies and waivers through legislation with Executive Order 
templates to be activated upon emergency declaration.

Immediate Next Steps: 

Convene and confirm potential initiative owners and 
contributing partners. 

Develop periodic meetings with local government and federal 
agencies to define scope and priorities.

Review possible arrangements to make recovery funds available 
to develop the feasibility study.

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS75REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT14

Potential Lead
Puerto Rico 
Department of 
Economic Development 
and Commerce

Potential Partners
NGOs; Philanthropic 
organizations; 
Regional consortiums; 
Municipalities; 
PRMA; URA

Potential Funders
Private investment; 
Philanthropic 
funds; CDBG-DR; 
Local and Puerto 
Rico Government 
budgets; Workforce 
investment boards 
and intermediaries; 
EDA Federal Grants; 
USDA Federal 
Grants; NGOs

Timeframe 

Short and medium term

Develop and implement a disaster resilience 
strategy for the micro and small businesses of 
Puerto Rico.

This initiative is intended to respond to the Hurricane María crisis with an 
explicit focus on micro and small business resilience. With up to 80% of  
the Island’s formal employment in the micro and small business sector, this 
initiative would provide tools to support baseline economic resilience through 
disaster preparedness. 

Action steps include:

Create a mechanism to provide grants and loans to micro or small businesses 
so that they may reopen, while incorporating resilience considerations in 
their operations. Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs)
and Community Development Banks (CDBs) are highly encouraged. 
Establish technical assistance programs that will also enable existing Non-
Government Organizations (NGOs) to grow and develop.

Develop specialized financing mechanisms for backup power supply 
(see Energy Sector Report). 

Prioritize  public  policies  that  aim  to  keep  businesses  open  by 
focusing on strengthening the entrepreneurial skillsets of  Small and 
Midsize Businesses (SMBs) and managers, as well as promoting the 
development of  CDBs and CDFIs that can provide more flexible 
access to financial tools, such as grants and loans, than commercial 
banking institutions. These public policies must: 

Create a Disaster Workforce Subsidy Program to help small businesses 
that are struggling to keep their doors open during disaster events.

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION76Develop small business risk management education and ‘audit’ tools, including 
preparedness for weather and seismic shocks.

Increase business continuity and recovery planning.

Provide guidance on managing business and household finances separately, as to 
protect the latter from business risks.

Explore collective risk transfer solutions, i.e., underwriting of risk pools and mutual 
insurance schemes.

Provide  specialized  business  development  support  and  local  supply  chain 
development, i.e., competing with online and big-box retail.

Immediate Next Steps: 

Confirm the roles of  initiative owners and contributing partners. 
Convene a kickoff workshop to design the initiative, including a 
phasing plan and site visits to relevant existing pilot projects.

Review similar programs that are utilizing SBA and 
CDBG-DR funding. 

Prepare and conduct a needs assessment of  business continuity 
programs and recovery capacities for micro and small businesses 
(i.e., surveys, data reviews, in-depth interviews).

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS77REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT15

Potential Lead
Puerto Rico Central 
Office of Recovery, 
Reconstruction, 
and Resilience

Potential Partners
GAR; PRPB; 
DNER; Puerto Rico 
Legislature

Potential Funders
EPA Environmental 
Education Grants 
Program; CDBG-DR; 
HMGP

Timeframe 

Medium and long term

Develop a public policy to promote the use of 
nature-based solutions in the reconstruction process 
of Puerto Rico.
In the short-term, this action will consist in the development of  a public policy 
that informs policy- and decision-makers, local permitting agencies, and the 
public on how nature-based solutions, such as green infrastructure, should be 
incorporated in the reconstruction process. This public policy framework will 
strengthen the capacity of  municipalities, the Government of  Puerto Rico, 
developers, and citizens to consider alternatives to gray infrastructure and base 
decisions on economic and resilience values. In the long-term, this initiative will 
raise awareness among all interested parties about natural infrastructure as a 
viable solution. 

There is a huge potential to enhance the recovery process and address 
the destruction caused by Hurricane María by incorporating nature-based or 
green infrastructure solutions in local planning, zoning, regulations, and built 
environment projects. Nature-based solutions are cost-effective and enhance 
natural, or modified ecosystems, to reduce coastal and river flooding, coastal 
erosion, landslides, and improve watershed management. There is additional 
potential for agriculture and forestry protection, climate change mitigation 
and adaptation, research, and disaster prevention. An example of  a similar 
policy exists in Maryland, which has the Living Shoreline Protection Act of  
2008 with its regulations, and was adopted in 2013. The law requires the use 
of  non-structural shoreline stabilization methods in tidal wetlands.

Action steps include:

Revise and propose amendments to the existing public policy framework, 
based on a comprehensive gap analysis (e.g., Joint Permits Regulation).

Define a decision-making framework and cost-benefit analysis tools 
to consider monetary benefits and costs in order to address the trade-
offs between immediate economic benefits and future benefits from 
social and ecosystem services.

Develop a monitoring system to evaluate the policy’s efficiency  
and effectiveness.

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION78Identify a priority pilot project to fast-track and demonstrate the 
value of  nature-based solutions in building resilience, creating public 
awareness, and enhancing visibility. 

Develop at least two pilot projects that: 

Develop wetlands for water and wastewater treatment to compensate 
or substitute the traditional wastewater treatment infrastructure.

Condition soils to improve biodiversity, restore natural functions 
(i.e.,  groundwater  replenishment),  increase  or  secure  land 
productivity, and enhance well-being.

Restore wetlands and living shorelines to augment and strengthen 
gray infrastructure, reduce flood risk, and protect shorelines from 
erosion caused by waves.

Develop multifunctional public green spaces to reduce heat island22 
effects, flooding, and climate change stresses, while improving life quality.

Enhance and generate innovative reefs to minimize erosion and 
coastal surge.

Develop a financing or incentive mechanism (monetary or non-monetary) 
to promote the use of  nature-based solutions during reconstruction.

Immediate Next Steps: 

Identify potential partners for initial discussions.

Design a scope of  work and parameters for a replicable 
pilot project.

Coordinate with possible initiative owners and partners to 
develop the pilot project.

Push for preliminary policy implementation within the 
recovery process.

22

According to the United States 
Environmental Protection Agency, 
the term "heat island" describes 
built up areas that are hotter than 
nearby rural areas. The annual 
mean air temperature of  a city 
with 1 million people or more can 
be 1.8–5.4°F (1–3°C) warmer than 
its surroundings. In the evening, 
the difference can be as high as 
22°F  (12°C).  Heat  islands  can 
affect communities by increasing 
summertime peak energy demand, 
air conditioning costs, air pollution 
and  greenhouse  gas  emissions, 
heat-related illnesses and mortality, 
and water quality. Please refer to 
the following homepage: https://
www.epa.gov/heat-islands 

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS79REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT16

Potential Lead
Puerto Rico 
Department of 
Transportation and 
Public Works

Potential Partners
COR3; FEMA

Potential Funders
USDOT; CDBG-DR

Timeframe 

Short and medium term

Introduce alternative energy sources to power 
transportation-related infrastructure.

This action focuses on assessing opportunities to generate alternative energy 
and introduce independent energy sources in order to add redundancy to the 
system and ensure greater reliability and resiliency. Building-up on best practice 
initiatives, such as increasing roundabouts, this assessment includes the evaluation 
of diverse distributed energy sources, including the use of solar power, batteries, 
and kinetic energy as a means of generating electricity. Also, this action includes 
the development and implementation of  a pilot program to expand the use of  
distributed energy sources in order to provide power supplies to transportation-
related assets and facilities. 

As transportation is a heavily power-dependent sector, and traditional energy 
sources are typically impacted by disasters, the aim is to reduce dependency on the 
electrical grid and provide alternative, independent and redundant energy sources. 
Traffic signals failure, for example, can significantly impact disaster recovery by 
increasing traffic congestion. Traffic chaos delays access to services and require 
the support of additional workforce to maintain traffic flows in more congested 
intersections. This action responds to both immediate issues resulting from shocks 
like Hurricanes Irma and María, while also providing more resilient solutions 
utilizing alternative energy technologies to provide redundant power sources for 
critical transportation infrastructure. The opportunities assessment and subsequent 
pilot program will evaluate the transportation infrastructure that could be optimized 
through alternative energy sources, such as roadway lighting and traffic signals.

Action steps include:

Identify priority transportation infrastructure whose outages, following 
Hurricanes Irma and María, significantly impacted recovery efforts due to 
ensuing traffic chaos and subsequent travel delays.

Identify potential alternative power sources to supply the prioritized circuits 
of traffic lights in the instance of a grid outage.

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION80Humacao, PR. Joshua L. DeMotts

Carry out a technical feasibility study of alternative power sources, including a cost-
benefit analysis of each alternative relative to its ability to support critical traffic signal 
functionality for post-disaster recovery.

Identify pilot project and funding to install alternative power sources.

Immediate Next Steps: 

Set up initial meetings with leads and partners to discuss 
initiative owners, contributing partners, and pilot projects.

Prepare  and  conduct  a  needs  assessment  of   power-
dependent infrastructures and recovery capacities.

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS81REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT17

Potential lead
Governor's Authorized 
Representative

Potential Partners
PREPA; DNER; 
PRASA; PRPB; 
PREMA; FEMA

Potential Funders
USACE; FEMA Dam 
Safety Program; 
HMGP

Timeframe 

Medium and long term

Improve the Puerto Rico Dam Safety Program to 
ensure coordination between responsible agencies 
and enhance community preparedness.

There is a need to improve the Puerto Rico Dam Safety Committee responsibilities 
and actions to ensure coordination between responsible agencies and enhanced 
community preparedness. The Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority (PREPA) 
presides and administers the Puerto Rico Dam Safety Committee in association 
with the Department of Natural and Environmental Resources (DNER), Puerto 
Rico Planning Board (PRPB), and the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer 
Authority (PRASA), and public-sector appointees by the Governor. However, 
the coordination and integration between these agencies are limited to periodical 
meetings with limited information sharing, where each agency responds directly 
to the federal regulator. This action looks to facilitate long-term engagement 
amongst responsible agencies as they continue to manage dam infrastructures. 
Vulnerabilities of  the dams, community planning, and warning systems 
were exacerbated with the impact of  Hurricane María. For example, the 
Guajataca Dam, in northern Puerto Rico, was one of  the most critical 
water system failures to occur as a result of  the hurricane. Due to heavy 
rains, the Guajataca Dam suffered a major breach in its emergency spillway. 
This exposed the dam to possible structural collapse and threatened more 
than hundreds of  Island residents downstream. 

Activities include:

Improve all plans and outreach related to dam safety.

Integrate the Puerto Rico Emergency Management Agency in the
Puerto Rico Dam Safety Committee.

Review all the inundation maps for dams and reservoirs to ensure they 
are updated (including hazard characterization and GIS formats. 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION82Utuado, PR. Joshua L. DeMotts

Conduct flood risk characterization and map dam failure limits on Puerto 
Rico comprehensive plan at the state and local level.

Install early-warning systems, train local officials and community leaders and 
conduct effective and participatory community planning capacity activities.

Immediate Next Steps: 

Convene and confirm potential initiative owners and 
contributing partners. 

Develop periodic meetings with local government and 
federal agencies to define scope and priorities.

Set up an assessment of needs and potential community 
pilot projects.

Develop and present a strategic improvement plan for the 
institutional, physical, and community levels.

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS83REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTSector Specific 
Opportunity 
Recommendations

A total of 97 recommendations were developed within 
six sectors: Housing; Energy; Physical Infrastructure; 
Health,  Education  &  Social  Services;  Natural 
Infrastructure;  and  Economic  Development.  Each 
sector produced a report that presents a goal for the 
sector  and  specific  actionable  recommendations. 
The complete set of Sector Reports, which include 
background, sector context and action details, are 
included in Appendix C of this document.

San Juan, PR. Han Kim

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION84Sector Sheet 
Guideline

Sector

HOUSING

ENERGY

PHYSICAL  

INFRASTRUCTURE

HEALTH, 

EDUCATION & 
SOCIAL SERVICES

ECONOMIC  
DEVELOPMENT

NATURAL  

INFRASTRUCTURE

A1

A2

A3

A4

A5

A6

A7

A8

A9

Sector Goal

Develop  a  portfolio  of  strategies  that  reduce  risk 
exposure,  foster  community  empowerment,  and 
address the diversity in socioeconomic conditions, 
housing types, and tenure in Puerto Rico.

HOUSING

Update the Island’s digital land cadastre to include: use and occupancy of  structures, land tenure 
data, housing characteristics in informal settlements, and information on insurance coverage.

Provide technical capacity to implement a place-based and community-driven approach for 
identifying and planning reconstruction projects through collaborative and deliberative engagement.

Develop feasible models to establish land tenure and/or community ownership in informal housing.

Increase the affordable housing stock for low and moderate-income (LMI) households through a series 
of strategies, such as: infill development in hazard-free urban centers or adjacent suburban areas, new 
construction using low-income housing tax credits (LIHTC), creating rental housing cooperatives, 
project-based Section 8 rental-assistance projects, and up-zoning for mixed-income housing.

Action Titles

Establish an Island-wide housing emergency management protocol that includes a voucher 
program for temporary housing, temporary rent control, foreclosure moratorium, and monitoring 
and prevention of  predatory lending.

Promote or incentivize community-driven, voluntary relocation of  households from high risk 
and environmentally sensitive areas, using land buyouts and rezoning for land conservation.

Repair, improve and retrofit public housing dwellings and facilities towards more resilient designs, 
including mitigation projects for public housing projects located in risk-prone areas.

Improve the ability of  local, municipal, and non-government agencies to regulate land use and 
construction through the adoption of  improved rules and practices. .

Establish municipal and non-governmental land-banks to create: (a) lease buyback programs to 
prevent mortgage foreclosures and (b) buyout schemes to acquire code-compliant foreclosed or 
vacant properties for affordable housing in hazard-free areas.

Action Number

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS85REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTHOUSING

Develop  a  portfolio  of  strategies  that  reduce  risk 
exposure,  foster  community  empowerment,  and 
address the diversity in socioeconomic conditions, 
housing types, and tenure in Puerto Rico.

A1

A2

A3

A4

A5

A6

A7

A8

A9

Update the Island’s digital land cadastre to include: use and occupancy of  structures, land tenure 
data, housing characteristics in informal settlements, and information on insurance coverage.

Provide technical capacity to implement a place-based and community-driven approach for 
identifying and planning reconstruction projects through collaborative and deliberative engagement.

Develop  feasible  models  to  establish  land  tenure  and/or  community  ownership  in 
informal housing.

Increase the affordable housing stock for low and moderate-income (LMI) households through a series 
of strategies, such as: infill development in hazard-free urban centers or adjacent suburban areas, new 
construction using low-income housing tax credits (LIHTC), creating rental housing cooperatives, 
project-based Section 8 rental-assistance projects, and up-zoning for mixed-income housing.

Establish an Island-wide housing emergency management protocol that includes a voucher 
program for temporary housing, temporary rent control, foreclosure moratorium, and monitoring 
and prevention of  predatory lending.

Promote or incentivize community-driven, voluntary relocation of households from high risk and 
environmentally sensitive areas, using land buyouts and rezoning for land conservation.

Repair, improve and retrofit public housing dwellings and facilities towards more resilient designs, 
including mitigation projects for public housing projects located in risk-prone areas.

Improve the ability of  local, municipal, and non-government agencies to regulate land use and 
construction through the adoption of  improved rules and practices.

Establish municipal and non-governmental land-banks to create: (a) lease buyback programs to 
prevent mortgage foreclosures and (b) buyout schemes to acquire code-compliant foreclosed or 
vacant properties for affordable housing in hazard-free areas.

86A10

Improve the capacity of  local Community Housing Development Organizations (CHDOs), 
Community Development Corporations (CDCorps), and Community Development Financial 
Institutions (CDFIs) to leverage financing for affordable and mixed-income housing developments, 
including low-income housing tax credits (LIHTC).

A11

Establish community-based emergency response procedures, identify emergency shelters, and 
train community volunteers.

A12

A13

A14

A15

A16

A17

A18

Create a path towards code compliance of  the informal housing sector through the development 
of  a Puerto Rico Building Code 'Applications Document' that supports simplified, streamlined, 
and cost-effective design and permitting based on locally-appropriate housing typologies for new 
homes and retrofits.

Create loans, grants, or subsidy programs to incentivize and support improvements on the physical 
resilience of  existing housing.

Create training and skills building certification programs, in the construction trades that are focused 
on locally appropriate housing repairs, retrofitting, and resilient building technologies and techniques.

Establish a building retrofit program in selected receptive communities.

Develop and disseminate a manual that provides practical guidance for do-it-yourself (DIY) repairs 
that will improve housing safety.

Create insurance pools and build public awareness to expand access to and utilization of  
disaster insurance.

Implement  a  communications  campaign  to  build  a  culture  of   household  emergency 
preparedness and awareness.

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS87REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTENERGY

Address Puerto Rico’s energy needs by transforming its 
electric power infrastructure to an affordable, reliable 
and innovative system, while reducing adverse impacts 
on human health and the environment.

Prepare a new Integrated Resource Plan (IRP), with public, community, and private sector 
participation, to be used as the foundation for the energy sector transformation and which includes 
an updated analysis and forecast of  the demand base, aggressive renewable generation targets, 
and a risk-based analysis of the sector to strengthen utility oversight and operator decision making.

Increase the diversity of  the energy fuel mix.

Rebuild, harden and modernize the transmission and distribution system for a minimum of  
energy security and resiliency.

Promote and enforce public policies and integrated regulations to allow the development of  
distributed energy.

Integrate microgrids, mini-grids, and renewable energy into the Island’s transmission and 
distribution grid to the greatest extent possible.

Establish reliable and diversified backup energy systems for vulnerable individuals and critical 
facilities, such as hospitals, schools, and emergency shelters and services facilities.

Facilitate access to backup energy systems/equipment to fill remaining gaps in individuals' capacity 
to generate backup electric power for small businesses.

Build capacity across the Island’s municipalities to plan, finance, and develop solar renewable 
energy systems for municipal buildings and facilities.

A1

A2

A3

A4

A5

A6

A7

A8

88Cataño, PR. Anthony L.'s

Create consumer participatory and collaborative mechanisms and public education initiatives to 
strengthen informed public decision making and engagement on efficient energy usage and the 
development of  resilient energy systems.

Establish a program to increase energy reliability of  Puerto Rico's critical water pumps systems.

A9

A10

A11

Promote the revitalization of  Puerto Rico's hydroelectric generation resources, as long as it is 
cost-effective.

A12

Implement an Island-wide energy efficiency and demand response strategy, detailing and 
prioritizing cost-effective initiatives to reduce and balance energy demand.

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS89REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTPHYSICAL  

INFRASTRUCTURE

Develop and maintain infrastructure systems that are 
accessible, integrated, flexible, and robust enough so 
they may sustain critical operations for the well-being 
of Puerto Ricans.

Critical Infrastructure Systems

A1

A2

A3

A4

A5

A6

A7

A8

A9

A10

Develop an integrated critical infrastructure management strategy to guide resilient long-term 
reconstruction.

Develop a master integrated Continuity of  Operations Plan (COOP) for critical infrastructures 
and providers.

Implement an integrated flood risk management approach.

Develop a critical infrastructure assessment and priority recovery plan to prioritize recovery and 
ongoing operations of  key transportation assets.

Improve the Puerto Rico Four Year Investment Program (PICA) with a risk-based asset management 
framework and integrated enforcement to embed resilience in the Island's infrastructure.

Improve the Puerto Rico Dam Safety Program to ensure coordination between responsible 
agencies and enhance community preparedness.

Assess and reduce the vulnerability of  critical infrastructure against landslides.

Develop and implement a Port Emergency Operations Plan.

Improve the waste management industry to enhance metrics gathering, industry data mining and 
analysis, and fund allocation.

Assess connectivity and develop a communication plan for primary anchor institutions.

90Critical Infrastructure Sectors

A11

A12

A13

A14

A15

A16

A17

A18

A19

A20

Commission a study of  potential solutions to build an Island-wide Next Generation Network 
that supports the long-term telecommunication needs.

Optimize recovery and reconstruction actions to the energy, transportation and telecommunications 
infrastructure to remove barriers to deployment and streamline building networks.

Commission a study to support the deployment (underground and aerial) of   a more resilient 
telecommunications infrastructure.

Develop a sustainable mobility plan to enhance and integrate Puerto Rico's multi-modal 
transportation services and offer diverse and affordable transit access.

Align reconstruction projects on the water systems to promote performance improvement on potable 
water infrastructure.

Develop a water efficiency program to improve water demand management through water 
conservation and use of  alternative water sources.

Increase robustness and flexibility of  vulnerable wastewater treatment systems.

Protect existing drinking water sources and mitigate contamination in order to improve drinking 
water quality.

Increase broadband adoption programs to support universal adoption of  next-generation 
communications services.

Develop a transportation technology strategy to integrate emerging technology services into the 
overall transportation network.

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS91REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTA21

A22

A23

A24

A25

Introduce  alternative  energy  sources  to  power 
transportation-related infrastructure.

Identify and integrate new drinking water sources into 
the water supply.

Update Puerto Rico building codes in order to enhance 
their enforcement on critical infrastructure, and promote 
nature-based solutions.

Establish redundant maritime sea cable connections.

Develop  an  inventory  of   emergency  response 
equipment, and train personnel to maintain and deploy 
such equipment.

Place-based Infrastructure

A26

A27

A28

A29

A30

Develop resilient community centers to improve the 
provision of services during emergencies and disaster relief.

Develop a training and capacity-building program to 
promote local businesses and effective public participation 
throughout the recovery process.

Develop an outreach and education program on domestic 
water treatment and storage in order to improve drinking 
water quality, at the point of  consumption in times of  
emergency, for rural communities.

Reconstruct  decentralized  wastewater  systems  to 
strengthen their recovery capacities.

Improve solid waste management in urban and rural 
communities by adopting a circular economy approach.

Río Grande, PR. Joshua L. DeMotts

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION92HEALTH, 

EDUCATION & 
SOCIAL SERVICES

Develop initiatives that ensure the provision of health, 
educational  and  social  services  to  reduce  existing 
and future vulnerabilities, and chart a pathway toward 
improved equity and well-being, with more participation 
of the people in its definition and implementation.

A1

A2

A3

A4

A5

A6

A7

A8

A9

Optimize healthcare financing to reduce the proportion of  uninsured people and the shortage 
of  healthcare professionals, and improve quality, access, and continuity of  healthcare provision 
in disaster-related emergencies.

Expand the scope and availability of  behavioral and mental health services.

Address the social and environmental determinants of  health that contribute to disease burden.

Promote schools as centers for education, social cohesion, and catalysts for economic development.

Explore opportunities for workforce training, placement, and retention in the education sector.

Increase the resilience of educational infrastructure to protect students in the face of disasters and 
provide enhanced benefits to students and their communities every day.

Invest in improvements to the physical infrastructure of  healthcare facilities in order to improve 
the provision of  services on a regular basis and in the face of  multiple hazards.

Create integrated government data systems, and improved access to these, to ensure transparency 
and preparedness while co-benefiting government structures with actual reliable data for informed 
decision-making processes.

Identify and support vulnerable members of  the population to address healthcare and social 
services needs related to the management of  catastrophic events and emergencies, as well as the 
ongoing care needs of  this population.

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS93REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTECONOMIC  
DEVELOPMENT

Craft a diversified portfolio of economic activities that 
augment Puerto Rico’s resiliency by enhancing existing 
capabilities, improving employment prospects, and 
reducing inequalities.

A1

A2

A3

A4

A5

A6

A7

A8

A9

Develop and implement a disaster resilience strategy for the micro and small businesses of  
Puerto Rico.

Promote the adoption of  best practices in enterprise risk management and business continuity 
planning for mid-sized companies. 

Leverage Hurricane María reconstruction investments to advance the construction sector's 
recovery, innovation, and resilience.

Ensure that reconstruction-related procurements give priority to local workforce employment, 
training, and certification. 

Prioritize Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) funding for training, re-training, 
and skills credentialing within priority industry clusters.

Develop on-Island employment/career opportunities for both Puerto Rican youth and for aging 
members of  the workforce, ensuring the quantity and quality of  the future workforce is able to 
support growth in prioritized economic sectors/clusters.

Support and communicate clear pathways for Puerto Rico’s youth and young adults to 
establish businesses, social enterprises, and professional services careers in Puerto Rico’s 
Next Generation Economy. 

Support social service programs that reduce family and child poverty to ensure the readiness of  
the future workforce. 

Strengthen broad-based, community-level economic development initiatives, building and 
strengthening Puerto Rico’s community economic development organizations and their networks 
through sustained, collective investments from the Puerto Rican diaspora associations, foundations, 
and crowd-sourcing activities.

94San Juan, PR. Ricardo Mangual

A10

A11

Develop and implement specific industry cluster strategies for economic sectors that are key to the 
resilience of Puerto Rican society, such as housing, power supply, health services and medicine, food, 
global supply chain, knowledge economy, and education. Expand the organizational capacity as part 
of economic development efforts focused on these sectors and the resilience of mid-sized  companies.

Review existing laws and regulations and simplify the permitting and licensing processes that 
are required to open a business, without compromising human or environmental capital, and 
attracting new investment. 

A12

Optimize the use of  and improve fiscal stewardship of  subsidies awarded to create quality jobs 
and stimulate economic activity. 

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS95REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTNATURAL  

INFRASTRUCTURE

Improve human health and well-being, foster economic 
development, and reduce exposure to hazards, through 
the sustainable use of Puerto Rico’s natural resources.

A1

A2

A3

A4

A5

A6

A7

Develop comprehensive watershed plans using integrated water resources management to promote 
the sustainable use of water resources and maximize the resultant economic and social well-being. 

Effectively implement the Puerto Rico Land Use Plan, following a risk-based framework, to 
achieve social well-being, economic development, and protect critical ecosystems. 

Adopt a post-disaster framework to delimitate the coastal maritime zone and effectively define land 
uses, development codes, and protect coastal ecosystems adapted to current and future conditions. 

Develop a public policy to promote the use of nature-based solutions in the reconstruction process 
of  Puerto Rico. 

Enforce open space determinations with programs/guidelines for the dedication of  lands to the 
creation of  parks, green infrastructure projects, land conservation, or other adequate uses.

Develop a coastal ecosystem restoration and enhancement program. 

Develop key policies, within and beyond the Common Agricultural Policy, to foster agroecology. 

A8

Develop green infrastructure design guidelines for urban areas, and identify and implement 
pilot projects.

96A9

Develop an integrated treatment program for wastewater and stormwater run-off to reduce sewage 
pollution affecting freshwater, coastal, and marine resources.

A10

Re-evaluate the design of  proposed flood control projects to integrate resilience criteria and 
nature-based solutions.

A11

Develop a training and capacity-building program to promote key green businesses in the 
recovery process. 

A12

Develop a comprehensive assessment of  natural resources to identify priority areas for 
intervention and conservation.

A13

Develop an integrated recycling program to promote the use of resourceful construction materials 
and create green jobs.

A14

A15

A16

Develop a program to promote sustainable agricultural practices. 

Develop an emergency preparedness and response plan for Puerto Rico’s natural resources. 

Create community gardens programs in rural and urban areas. 

STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS97REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTRESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION

METHODOLOGY

03

San Juan, PR. AI R

The main objective of the ReImagina Puerto Rico project is to produce 
an actionable and timely set of recommendations to guide the use of 
philanthropic, local government and federal recovery funds to help rebuild 
Puerto Rico in a way that makes the Island stronger – physically, economically, 
and socially – and better prepared to confront future challenges. 

To achieve this, the Commission combined two primary conceptual 
frameworks to guide the process of reimagining Puerto Rico’s recovery 
and reconstruction:

FEMA's National 
Disaster Recovery 
Framework

The Rockefeller 
Foundation's 
City Resilience 
Framework

METHODOLOGYNDRFCRF99REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTThis is a guide that enables effective recovery support to disaster-impacted jurisdictions. It 
provides a flexible structure that enables disaster recovery managers to operate in a unified 
and collaborative manner. The framework establishes a common platform and forum for a 
comprehensive approach to how a community builds, sustains, and coordinates the delivery 
of  recovery efforts. 

The NDRF advances the concept that recovery extends beyond simply repairing 
damaged structures. Under this framework, recovery includes the continuation or restoration 
of  services that are critical to support the physical, emotional, and financial well-being of  
impacted community members. Recovery also includes the restoration and strengthening 
of  key systems and resource assets that are critical to the economic stability, vitality, and 
long-term sustainability of  the communities themselves23. These recovery elements are 
organized and coordinated under the following six Recovery Support Functions: 

Health and Social Services: 
Restore and improve health and social services capabilities and networks to 
promote the resilience, independence, health (including behavioral health), and 
well-being of  the whole community.
Natural and Cultural Resources: 
Protect natural and cultural resources and historic properties through appropriate 
planning, mitigation, response, and recovery actions to preserve, conserve, 
rehabilitate, and restore them consistent with post-disaster community priorities 
and best practices and in compliance with applicable environmental and historic 
preservation laws and executive orders. 
Community Planning: 
Conduct a systematic process engaging the whole community as appropriate 
in the development of  executable strategic, operational, and/or tactical- level 
approaches to meet defined objectives.
Infrastructure Systems: 
Stabilize critical infrastructure functions, minimize health and safety threats, and efficiently 
restore and revitalize systems and services to support a viable, resilient community.
Economic Recovery: 
Return economic and business activities (including food and agriculture) to a 
healthy state and develop new business and employment opportunities that result 
in an economically viable community.
Housing: 
Implement housing solutions that effectively support the needs of  the whole 
community and contribute to its sustainability and resilience.

In the aftermath of Hurricanes Irma and María in 2017, this framework will guide all federal 
disaster recovery actions coordinated by FEMA in Puerto Rico.

NDRFRESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION100Education & 

Health, 
Social 
Services

Natural 

Infrastructure

Natural 

Infrastructure

F2

Relationship between NDRF 
Recovery Support Functions 
and the main working group 
sectors as analyzed by 
ReImagina Puerto Rico.

Housing

Education & 

Health, 
Social 
Services

Natural 

Infrastructure

Physical 

Infrastructure

Physical 

Infrastructure

Energy

Economic 
Development

Housing

Considering  that  the  NDRF  will  serve  as  the  main 
framework  to  guide  the  planning,  implementation, 
execution, and monitoring of recovery and reconstruction 
actions in Puerto Rico, the Commission determined six 
sectors, using NDRF’s Recovery Support Functions as a 
basis. For each sector, a working group was formed and 
given the directive to diagnose, analyze, and prioritize 
recovery and reconstruction actions with the highest 
resilience impact, using a slightly modified version of the 
CRF as a methodological guide. The Commission's sectors 
have direct linkages to all Recovery Support Function areas 
under the NDRF, as described in Figure 2. 

METHODOLOGYHealth &Social ServicesCommunity PlanningEconomic RecoveryNatural and Cultural ResourcesInfrastructure SystemsHousing101REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTThe City Resilience Framework (CRF)24 provides a lens to understand the complexity 
of  cities or systems and the drivers that contribute to their resilience. These drivers can 
help cities to assess the extent of  their resilience, to identify critical areas of  weakness, 
and identify actions and programs to improve the city’s resilience. It provides a more 
comprehensive vision of  how resilience can be integrated into the Puerto Rico post-disaster 
recovery context. 

The CRF, while originally focused on a city scale, provides a conceptual framework of  
resilience that is applicable across different geographical scales. The framework identifies four 
dimensions of resilience that comprise 12 drivers. The drivers describe fundamental attributes 
of  resilient systems. They are organized as follows: 
 

Leadership & Strategy
1.  Effective leadership & management
2.  Empowered stakeholders
3. 

Integrated development planning

Health & Well-being
4.  Minimal human vulnerability
5.  Diverse livelihoods & employment
6.  Effective safeguards to human health & life

Economy & Society
7.  Collective identity & community support
8.  Comprehensive security & rule of law
9.  Sustainable economy

Infrastructure & Environment
10. Reduced exposure & fragility
11. Effective provision of critical services
12. Reliable mobility & communications

F3

City Resilience Framework. 
This graphic represents the 
four dimensions of resilience, 
the 12 factors that contribute 
to resilience, and their 
interaction with the seven 
qualities of resilient systems.

CRFRESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION102These dimensions and drivers of  resilience interact with the qualities of  resilient systems, as is shown in Figure 
3. This means, for instance, that to achieve long-term and integrated planning the planning process needs to be 
reflective, inclusive, and integrated. 

3

4

2

Leadership & Strate g y

1

12

I

n

f

r

a

s
t
r

u

c
t
u
r
e
 
&

 E
n

viron

11

ment

Health & 

W

5

ell-

b

e
i

n

g

E c o n o m y & Society

8

6

7

F l e x ible
R e d u n dant
R o b ust
s o u r c e ful
e f  e c t i v e
R
I n c l u s i v e  
In t e g r a t ed 

e

R

City Resilience 

Framework 

10

9

METHODOLOGY103REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTThis framework also identifies 

seven qualities of resilient systems: 

Refers to designs that are well-conceived, 
constructed and managed and that include 
provisions to ensure failure is predictable, 
safe, and not disproportionate to the cause.

Refers to processes that bring together 
systems and institutions and that can 
catalyze additional benefits as resources 
are shared and actors are enabled to work 
together to achieve greater ends.

Refers to spare capacity purposively created
to accommodate disruption due to extreme
pressures, surges in demand, or an external
event. It includes diversity, where there are
multiple ways to achieve a given need.

Refers to the use of  past experiences to 
inform future decisions and the capacity to 
modify standards and behaviors accordingly.

Refers to processes that emphasize the need 
for broad consultation and ‘many seats at the 
table’ to create a sense of shared ownership 
or a joint vision to build resilience.

Refers to people and institutions that can recognize 
alternative ways to use reflective resources at times 
of crisis to meet their needs or achieve their goals.

Refers to the willingness and ability to adopt alternative 
strategies in response to changing circumstances or 
sudden crises. Systems can be made more flexible 
through the introduction of new technologies or 
knowledge, including recognizing traditional practices.

ReflectiveRobustIntegratedRedundantInclusiveResourcefulFlexibleRESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION104METHODOLOGY

ReImagina Puerto 
Rico: An Intrinsically 
Participatory Process 

With  the  methodological  frameworks  and 
sectors defined, the Commission embarked 
on an ambitious participatory and consensus-
building process to achieve the main goal and 
objectives set forth for ReImagina Puerto Rico, 
as described in Section I. This process was 
divided into four main sets of group meetings: 

Public Sector 
Advisory Group

Sector-focused 
Working Groups

Youth Participatory 
Photography

Community 
Focus Groups

This  process  sought  to  bring  the  widest 
and  most  diverse  set  of   voices  together, 
facilitating an important conversation between 
students, community groups, business sector 
representatives, high-level government officials, 
academics and other Puerto Rican leaders to re-

imagine a more resilient Puerto Rico. The diverse 
set of meetings and discussions held between 
the  Public  Sector  Advisory  Group,  Working 
Groups, Community Focus Groups, and the Youth 
Participatory Photography helped create and 
validate the information presented in this report. 

New York, USA. Elías Núñez

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT

Public Sector  
Advisory Group
A group of government officials that 
received the Commission's reports 
and were encouraged to provide 
their comments, feedback, and 
recommendations.  

This group included high-level officials 
from  key  Puerto  Rico  government 
agencies, as well as mayors from rural 
and urban municipalities representing 
the  Island's  main  political  parties. 
Meetings included representatives from 
the Puerto Rico Planning Board, Puerto 
Rico Department of  Transportation and 
Public Works, Puerto Rico Department 
of  Housing, Puerto Rico Department of  
Natural and Environmental Resources, 
the  Puerto  Rico  Central  Office  of  
Recovery, Reconstruction and Resilience, 
the  Governor’s  representative  to  the 
Financial Oversight and Management 

Board for Puerto Rico, and the mayors of  
Bayamón, Carolina, Cidra and Villalba. 
The  first  Public  Sector  Advisory 
Group meeting took place on February 
28th, 2018 with subsequent one-on-one 
conversations with government officials 
between the months of  March and May. 
On the second official meeting, which 
took place on May 8th, the Commission 
presented the preliminary results and 
recommended actions that came from 
the  ReImagina  Puerto  Rico  project. 
They also discussed opportunities and 
feasibility for the implementation of  the 
recommended actions. 

Meetings with 
government officials

February

March

April

2018

28th

May

8th

1st Meeting

2nd Meeting

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION106Sector-focused  
Working Groups
Each sector defined a working group, 
of approximately 20 people, that 
included civil society leaders, experts, 
and representatives from relevant 
organizations to the sector.

The Working 
Groups were 
divided into six 
key sectors: 

Housing

Energy

Physical  
Infrastructure

Health, Education 
& Social Services

Economic  
Development

Natural  
Infrastructure

February

March

April

May

2018

13th - 15th

13th - 15th

10th - 12th

1st Working Group
Meetings: 
Identification of 
Opportunities

2nd Working Group 
Meetings: Refining of 
Opportunity Actions

3rd Working Group 
Meetings: Final Draft 
Recommendations

METHODOLOGY107REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTThe purpose of the Working Groups was to facilitate a technical discussion among Puerto Rican 
experts, business and sector leaders, and relevant community actors in order to identify goals, 
objectives, and actions that contribute to the resilient recovery and reconstruction of the sector. 
This process was carried out in three Working Group meetings that took place in February, March, 
and April of 2018.

1

First Working Group Meetings

The first Working Group meetings took place on February 13th to 15th, 
2018 in San Juan. The work focused on the identification of  needs and 
opportunities. The goal was to identify a preliminary list of  main issues, 
recovery goals, and opportunities for resilient policies and actions. There 
were over 65 participants across all six Working Groups.  

Second Working Group Meetings

The second Working Group meetings took place on March 13th to 
15th, 2018 in San Juan. The work focused on scoping and refining 
opportunity actions, following-up on information that emerged 
in the Community Outreach and Engagement Process (described 
later), and finalizing the general objectives of  the sector, as well 
as actions that even though important had not been considered. 
There were over 75 participants across all six Working Groups.

2

Third Working Group Meetings
The third Working Group meetings took place on April 10th to 12th, 2018 in 
San Juan. They focused on validating the goals, objectives, and a general list 
of  recommendations. The work also included applying a resilience lens to 
the proposed actions, analyzing interdependencies and resilience qualities, 
defining co-benefits, and prioritizing the recommendations. There were over 
110 participants across all six Working Groups.

3

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION108The process of developing recommendations 
for the resilient recovery of Puerto Rico 
accounted for its unique context:

The urban/rural divide on the Island, 
recognizing that resilient economic 
development opportunities for all areas 
are equally important. 

The variety of ecosystems present in 
the Island, and the challenges and 
opportunities that they each represent. 

Issues of equity, transparency, 
and sustainability.

The economic, political, and 
geographical realities of Puerto Rico.

109REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTMETHODOLOGYYouth Participatory 
Photography
This part of the process included a 
participatory photography exercise that 
was held in six schools (one per region) 
of Puerto Rico.

This  program  was  carried  out  in  six 
schools across the Island (one in each 
region), with two visits to each school. 
Students were given the opportunity to 
identify and photograph assets in their 
community that were important for them 
to maintain and improve. The first visit 
with  the  students  took  place  between 
February 5th and 9th, 2018. Approximately 
360 students took part in this initiative. 
Meetings were organized in San Juan, 
Humacao,  Guayama,  Barranquitas, 
Utuado,  and  Lajas.  The  objective  of  
the  Youth  Participatory  Photography 
activity was to allow and encourage the 
young population to identify, through 
photography, important resilience and 

recovery challenges in their community.
The second visit was on February 20th 
to 23rd, 2018. The students discussed 
their photos within their group. They 
described their intentions behind the 
photos and what their priorities were 
for improvements in their communities. 
They  also  displayed  and  presented 
their photos to their communities and  
family members, and other residents 
commented. The Commission facilitated 
a conversation about the importance of  
changing and improving certain aspects 
of  their communities, especially after the 
hurricanes. All of  the information that 
was gathered was considered as input for 
the development of  the Sector Reports.

Youth Participatory 
Photography 

February

March

April

May

2018

5th - 9th

20th - 23rd

1st Visit

2nd Visit

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION110Community  
Focus Groups
This part of the process included Community 
Focus Groups in six regions of Puerto Rico, 
a Focus Group with the diaspora in central 
Florida, and a Focus Groups with NGOs.

These meetings were organized in the six regions that were defined. Also, 
two extra Focus Groups were carried out:

With philanthropic leaders and other NGOs in San Juan on March 1st, 2018 
and on April 18th, 2018. These meetings provided an Island-wide perspective 
on the issues. Twenty-nine participants represented 22 NGOs in the first 
meeting and 12 participants represented 11 NGOs in the second one.

With Puerto Rican diaspora in Orlando, Florida on March 24th, 2018. There 
were over 20 participants. The main objective of  this Focus Group was to 
obtain an Island-wide perspective on recovery and resilience from the diaspora 
in central Florida, where most Puerto Ricans have migrated to over the past 
year.

Community Focus Groups 

February

2018

February 27th - March 5th

1st Round

Orlando, Florida

March

April

May

24th

18th - 20th

2nd Round

METHODOLOGY21111REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTThe Community Focus Groups took place after the first set of Working Group 
meetings. They were designed this way in order to be able to socialize the work 
of the Working Groups, elaborate and refine unmet needs, and validate goals, 
objectives, and actions. The six meetings were organized in San Juan, Humacao, 
Arecibo, Caguas, Ponce, and Mayagüez. 

1st Round

The first round of  Community Focus Groups took place between 
February 27th and March 7th, 2018. There were over 115 participants 
in total. This first round focused on describing the initial results from the 
first Working Group meetings. They facilitated a discussion about unmet 
needs before, during, and after Hurricane María, as well as the main 
shocks and stresses affecting Puerto Rico. The initial set of opportunities 
identified for resilient actions were also prioritized. 

2nd Round

The  second  round  of   Community  Focus  Groups  took  place 
between April 17th and 20th, 2018. There were approximately 57 
participants in this round. During this second round of  meetings, 
the Commission presented the information produced in the third 
Working Group meetings. Participants provided feedback regarding 
the priorities for action, as well as recommendations to improve 
existing recommendations.

The information gathered throughout the Community Focus Groups served as 
a basis for the identification of unmet needs described in Section I of this report 
and in each of the recommendations proposed in the sector reports. In general, 
the information and perspectives obtained from the Community Focus Groups 
were an integral part of all the discussions, they informed the process, and have 
been incorporated in the actions and recommendations presented in this report. 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION112METHODOLOGY

The Community 
Outreach and 
Engagement Process 
has been an integral 
part of the ReImagina 
Puerto Rico project 
approach.

Sunset, PR. Trish Hartmann

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTOrlando

FLORIDA

Community Focus Groups
with the Puerto Rican Diaspora
OVER 20 PARTICIPANTS

Youth Participatory 
Photography

6 schools
360 students

San Juan, Humacao, Guayama, 
Barranquitas, Utuado, and Lajas

The Community Outreach and 
Engagement Process had two 
sets of activities:

Youth Participatory 
Photography

Community 
Focus Groups

Each of the activities were held in six distinct regions of the Island. 
These regions were strategically selected to represent all areas of 
Puerto Rico, including the urban/rural divide and other geographical, 
social,  cultural,  and  regional  characteristics.  Figure  4  shows  the 
functional regions selected to carry out the activities of the Community 
Outreach and Engagement Process.  

114F4

Functional regions in Puerto Rico. These regions were used to coordinate 
meetings related to the Community Outreach and Engagement Process.

Arecibo / Manatí

Mayagüez / 
Aguadilla

San Juan

Caguas / Cayey

Fajardo / 
Humacao

Ponce /Guayama

First round of  
Community Focus Groups 
over 115 
participants

Second round of  
Community Focus Groups 
approximately 
57 participants 

1

2

During the second part of the Youth  
Participatory Photography activity, 

students presented their photos to their 
communities and family members

29 participants

representing 22 NGOs  
in the first meeting

12 participants

representing 11 NGOs  
in the second meeting 

San Juan

PUERTO RICO

METHODOLOGYCommunity Focus Groups with  philanthropic leaders and NGOs:115REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTRESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION

PUERTO RICO'S 
PATH TO RESILIENT 
RECOVERY AND 
RECONSTRUCTION

04

Cayey, PR. Félix Aponte González

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION116Puerto Rico’s recovery is unfolding across multiple timescales and 
with multiple partners. As the urgent, immediate needs for relief are 
being addressed, there is more opportunity to pursue improvements 
that will benefit communities over longer time horizons. The strategic 
recommendations presented in this report present a comprehensive 
path forward for all development and reconstruction processes in 
Puerto Rico. This path is rooted in a participatory process that is 
tailored to respond to and empower a broad set of actors. It is also 
calibrated to offer actionable, realistic interventions.

The  Commission  is  not  operating 
in  a  vacuum.  In  full  view  of   this,  the 
Commission  adopted  an  accelerated 
timeline  to  produce  this  report  to 
complement the on-going post-disaster 
recovery strategic plan currently developed 
by mandate of the U.S. Congress under 
the Bipartisan Budget Act of  2018 (H.R. 
1892)25. This plan, due on August 8th, 
2018,  will  provide  both  Puerto  Rico 
and the U.S. federal government with 
a strategic action plan to guide the use 
of  federal funds toward recovery actions 
for the next two years. Considering the 
extent of  the federal funding available to 
support recovery actions in the aftermath 
of  Hurricane María, contributions from 
the  ReImagina  Puerto  Rico  project 
to this plan should be helpful for the 
responsible government agencies towards 
achieving more resilient recovery actions.
The results from this report are but 
an initial step toward a broader journey 
of reimagining Puerto Rico as it reinvents 

itself  in the wake of  such major disasters. 
While  this  process  aims  at  providing 
a  broad  set  of   recommendations  to 
use  federal,  local  government,  and 
philanthropic  funds  for  recovery  and 
reconstruction  actions,  its  results  are 
expected to feed into the broader post-
disaster recovery process (see figure 5). 
As the combined efforts of  community 
groups, public schools, NGOs, federal 
agencies, and Puerto Rico government 
institutions  move  toward  advancing 
the recovery efforts, ReImagina Puerto 
Rico  will  help  bolster  their  ongoing 
recommendations  while  engaging  a 
broad set of  actors in moving forward 
a  stronger  recovery  for  the  Island.  A 
resilience-focused post-disaster recovery 
planning  process  is  needed  to  ensure 
these  recommendations  are  properly 
coordinated, implemented and evaluated 
in order to measure its success for the 
collective benefit of  the people living in 
Puerto Rico.

PUERTO RICO'S PATH TO RESILIENT RECOVERY AND RECONSTRUCTION117REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTF5

Post-disaster recovery planning timelines.

Working Groups 

Focus Groups

Commissioner's 
Meeting

Focus Group, 
Orlando, FL

Press 
Seminar

Presentation of 
Draft Report to 
Board of Directors

Start of Regional 
Report Presentations

Report 
Presentation

February

March

April

May

June

July

1

1

2

3

2

7th

7th

20th 26th

13th - 15th

28th - 5th

13th - 15th

10th - 12th

18th - 20th

February

March

April

May

June

July

7th

5th - 10th

15th

7th

10th

14th

29th

Public Hearings
Announcement

Public 
Hearings

Financial & Capacity 
Certification

Draft 
Plan

Draft 
Publication

Plan 
Submital 

HUD Recommendations
and Comments

February

March

April

May

June

July

August

9th

Law HR 1892 is 
signed, ordering the 
beginning of the plan

19th

9th

8th

Plan Draft

Plan Draft  
for Public 
Comments

Delivery of the Recovery 
Plan of Puerto Rico to the 
United States Congress

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION118Specific Pledges of 
the Commission 

The Commission aims to support and work with all the different actors involved in the rebuilding 
and reconstruction efforts for Puerto Rico, specifically the following:

1

2
3
4

The Puerto Rico Central Office of Recovery, Reconstruction, and Resilience 
(COR3) and the Government of Puerto Rico
The Commission pledges to provide all available technical resources and analysis used to develop 
this report to the COR3 and the Puerto Rico Department of Housing teams developing strategic 
recovery action plans for Puerto Rico. The Commission stands ready to support current and 
future recovery activities and ask that the government consider the comprehensive input from 
stakeholders across the Island and diaspora that went into this reports’ recommendations.

The U.S. Federal Government

The Commission pledges to work with all relevant federal agencies in order to advise 
and guide funding and recovery programs.

Puerto Rico’s Private Sector

The Commission pledges to provide a coordinating role for private sector actors to 
support the implementation of  these recommendations.

Puerto Rico Mayors and Municipalities

The Commission pledges to communicate and disseminate the ReImagina Puerto Rico 
Report amongst mayors and municipalities, and support them in incorporating and 
implementing them in their work plans.

119REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTPUERTO RICO'S PATH TO RESILIENT RECOVERY AND RECONSTRUCTION5

6

Organized Communities

The Commission pledges to communicate and disseminate the ReImagina Puerto Rico 
Report among community groups and organizations. The Commission will support them 
in incorporating and implementing the recommendations in their recovery initiatives, and 
work with organized communities to advise and guide them regarding access to funding and 
recovery programs. 

Philanthropies and Donors 

The Commission pledges to support all the aforementioned actors in establishing 
links with other philanthropic organizations and donors interested in funding flagship 
recommendations and projects. 

The recommendations developed through ReImagina 
Puerto Rico should be able to guide every element of the 
recovery planning processes moving forward. However, 
Puerto Rico's recovery process will require actions beyond 
the scope of these strategic recommendations. There is still 
a need for a broader, participatory, and comprehensive post-
disaster recovery plan for Puerto Rico that extends beyond 
the scope of the U.S. Congress mandate. The Commission 
will serve as a conduit to help organize and support this 
important step towards the long-term recovery of Puerto 
Rico, building upon its experiences in this project.

The recommendations from this report are not only 
important to support government recovery processes 
implemented by federal and Puerto Rico agencies, but 
also to influence municipal governments, community 
organizations and NGOs who have been at the forefront 
of  disaster response and recovery actions across Puerto 
Rico after Hurricane María. Municipal governments, 
community organizations, and NGOs can use these 
recommendations to implement actions within their 
communities. These actors have been providing direct 
critical support to the most vulnerable populations 

and empowering local communities, even before the 
hurricane impacts. Several recommendations presented 
in this report are also focused on the community and 
municipal levels. By continuing with its participatory 
approach,  the  Commission  can  help  implement 
these initiatives at the local level, providing a conduit 
between these entities and other philanthropic and U.S. 
federal entities looking to support high-impact actions 
with cross benefits to most distressed and affected 
communities. 

As the Island continues to move ahead on its journey 
toward recovery, ReImagina Puerto Rico brought forth a 
participatory process to jumpstart a conversation with a 
broad set of actors. It’s a strong foundation that must be 
built upon thoughtfully. It offers an invitation to create a 
vision for a resilient Puerto Rico, where people can build a 
stronger, more equitable and just society for its present and 
future generations. Above all, the project calls everyone to 
work together to reimagine Puerto Rico and collaborate 
to make this new vision a reality for all.

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION120There is still a need 
for a broader, 
participatory and 
comprehensive 
post-disaster 
recovery plan for 
Puerto Rico that 
extends beyond the 
scope of the U.S. 
Congress mandate.

San Juan, PR. Prayitno

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT

PUERTO RICO'S PATH TO RESILIENT RECOVERY AND RECONSTRUCTIONRESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION

APPENDIXES

05

San Juan, PR. AI R

Appendix A:  
Structure of the Commission, Co-Chairs, 
Commissioners, and Secretariat

WHO

Funders

Commission

Consultants

Co-Chairs

AECOM

Commissioners

100 Resilient 

Cities

Executive
Director +
Secretariat

CNE

Ford

Foundation

The 

Rockefeller 
Foundation

Open Society
Foundations

HOW

REIMAGINE PUERTO RICO REPORT

Youth Participatory

Photography

Working
Groups 

Community 
Focus Groups

Public Sector 
Advisory Group 

APPENDIXES123REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTCommission
Co-Chairs 

RICHARD L. CARRIÓN
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN, POPULAR, INC. 

Richard L. Carrión is the Executive Chairman of  
the Board of  Directors of  Popular, Inc., a publicly 
traded (BPOP) financial holding company. Banco 
Popular, a wholly owned subsidiary of  Popular, Inc., 
is Puerto Rico's leading depository institution. Mr. 
Carrión served as Popular’s Chief  Executive Officer 
and Chairman of  the Board from 1991 to 2017.

After obtaining a bachelor’s degree from the Wharton 
School of  Finance at the University of  Pennsylvania 
and receiving a master’s degree in information services 
from the Massachusetts Institute of  Technology 
(MIT), Mr. Carrión joined Banco Popular in 1976.
In the information technology arena, Mr. Carrión’s 
vision brought the first network of  ATMs to Puerto 
Rico and many other Latin American countries and 
spearheaded the successful migration from paper to 
electronic transactions.

Mr. Carrión sits on the Board of Directors of Verizon 
Communications since 1995, where he is a member 
of the Human Resources and Corporate Governance 
and Policy Committees and is Chairman of  the 
Finance Committee. He also served as class A director 
of  the Federal Reserve Bank of  New York from 2008 
through 2015. 

Mr. Carrión’s 
enthusiasm and 
energy in professional 
matters is coupled 
with a deep sense of 
social justice.

Mr. Carrión’s enthusiasm and energy in professional 
matters are coupled with a deep sense of  social justice. 
He has been a member of  the International Olympic 
Committee (IOC) since 1990, where he chaired the 
Finance Commission and the Audit Committee from 
2002 until 2013. He was a member of the IOC Executive 
Board from 2004 until 2012. He is a founding member 
and trustee of  the Banco Popular Foundation.

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION124DR. CARMEN  
MILAGROS CONCEPCIÓN
CHAIR OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL 
OF PLANNING, UNIVERSITY OF 
PUERTO RICO 

Carmen  Milagros  Concepción  is  professor  and 
director of  the Graduate School of  Planning at the 
University of  Puerto Rico, Río Piedras campus. She 
completed a Ph.D. in City and Regional Planning 
and a post-doctorate in Environmental Policy at 
the University of  California, Berkeley. She holds a 
master’s in planning and a B.S. in Physics from the 
University of  Puerto Rico. 

Her research has focused on environmental policy 
and regulation, socio-environmental movements 
and organizations, institutions, and governance, 
topics on which she has published in academic and 
professional journals in Puerto Rico and abroad. She 
recently co-edited (with Gustavo García-López and 
Alejandro Torres-Abreu) the book manuscript entitled 
Environment and Democracy: Experiences of  Community-
Based Environmental Management in Puerto Rico, which 
has been accepted for publication by the University 
of  Puerto Rico Press.

Dr. Concepción was director of  the Social Sciences 
Research Center of  the University of  Puerto Rico 
from 2006 until 2009. Before becoming a faculty 
member of  the Graduate School of  Planning, she 
taught at San Diego State University and the New 
School for Social Research. Dr. Concepción also has 
a professional trajectory in the public service.Before 
beginning her doctoral studies, she held positions 
as a planner, researcher, and consultant in various 
agencies and entities of  the Government of  Puerto 
Rico, including the Municipality of  San Juan, the 

Her research has focused 
on environmental 
policy and regulation, 
socio-environmental 
movements and 
organizations, institutions, 
and governance. 

Puerto Rico Planning Board, the Puerto Rico Energy 
Office, the Right to Employment Administration, the 
Commission on Educational Reform, and the House of  
Representatives. She also worked for the Planning Office 
of  the Puerto Rico Legal Services Corporation.

APPENDIXES125REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTDR. ANA MARÍA  
GARCÍA BLANCO
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, INSTITUTO 
NUEVA ESCUELA

Dr.  García  Blanco  is  the  Executive  Director 
of   Instituto  Nueva  Escuela  (INE),  a  nonprofit 
organization dedicated to improving Puerto Rican 
students’ academic and socio-emotional outcomes 
through the implementation of Montessori education 
in the public school setting. Dr. Ana María García 
Blanco is the founder and former principal of  the 
first public Montessori school in Puerto Rico, Juan 
Ponce  de  Leon  Elementary  School  (JPL)  in  the 
municipality of  Guaynabo (established in 1990). In 
response to growing requests from other communities 
across the island to replicate JPL’s public Montessori 
model in their neighborhood schools, Dr. García 
Blanco founded INE in 2008. INE works with 50 
public schools and community organizations across 
27 municipalities in Puerto Rico. 

Dr.  Ana  María  García  Blanco  holds  an  EdD  in 
Philosophy in Education and Human Development 
from Harvard University, where she also completed 
her bachelor’s and master's degree. Her doctoral 
thesis was an ethnographic study of  the emergence 
of  the community school model in Juan Domingo 
in Guaynabo, Puerto Rico. Throughout her career, 
she has given courses in the main universities in 
PR: Universidad de Puerto Rico in Río Piedras, 
Universidad del Sagrado Corazón in Santurce, and 
Universidad Interamericana, metro area. Dr. García 
Blanco worked as director of La Nueva Escuela Juan 
Ponce de León in Guaynabo for 23 years. Using an 
innovative approach and the Montessori method, she 
managed to reduce violence in the school and increase 
the academic performance of students.

Using an innovative 
approach and the 
Montessori method, 
she managed to reduce 
violence in the school and 
increase the academic 
performance of students. 

She is the author of several educational publications. Among 
them: "The Participation of Parents", "The Education of  
the Youth", and "The Collective Work of the Teachers" of  
the "Tertulias de Aquí" section of the Diálogo newspaper.

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION126MIGUEL A. SOTO-CLASS
PRESIDENT, CENTER FOR A  
NEW ECONOMY

Mike Soto founded the Center for a New Economy 
(CNE) in 1998, and since then, has steered CNE 
into  becoming  one  of   the  most  credible  and 
influential voices in Puerto Rico. Since 2014, CNE 
has been recognized as one of  the Top Think-
Tanks to Watch by the Global Think Tank Report 
of  the University of  Pennsylvania.

Mike has served as a member of the Community 
Innovator's Lab at MIT in Boston, Massachusetts, 
and the YouthSave Advisory Board at the New 
America Foundation in Washington, D.C. In 2008, 
he was selected as an Aspen Institute Ideas Fellow.

Mike was an editor of  The Economy of  Puerto 
Rico:  Restoring  Growth,  published  by  the 
Brookings Institution in 2006 and selected, that 
same year, as a Notable Book by the American 
Library Association. He has been a columnist for El 
Nuevo Día, Puerto Rico’s largest daily circulation, 
since 2003, and was the host of a weekly news radio 
program on economics for several years.

He is currently the Yale Alumni Schools Director 
for  Puerto  Rico  and  the  Virgin  Islands.  He 
is also a member of  the Board of  Directors 
of   the  Baldwin  School  of   Puerto  Rico,  an 
Emeritus  Member  of   the  Advisory  Council 
for  the  Conservation  Trust  of   Puerto  Rico, 
and the Chairman of  Espacios Abiertos, an 
organization dedicated to growing civic capacity 
and promoting transparency in Puerto Rico. 
Mike has a B.A. from Yale University and a Juris 
Doctor from Vanderbilt University.

He has steered CNE 
into becoming one of 
the most credible and 
influential voices in  
Puerto Rico. Since 2014, 
CNE has been recognized 
as one of the Top  
Think-Tanks to Watch by 
the Global Think Tank 
Report of the University 
of Pennsylvania.

APPENDIXES127REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTFEDERICO (FRIEDEL) STUBBE
CHAIRMAN, PRISA GROUP

Mr.  Stubbe  is  a  Chairman  of   the  PRISA 
Group, developers of  Green Resort Residential 
Communities  and  hotels  in  Puerto  Rico. 
An  award-winning  developer  of   planned 
communities, he is an understated yet confident 
visionary. Stubbe is one of  Puerto Rico’s largest 
developer- builders of residential, master-planned 
communities with over $100 million in annual 
sales and more than 800 employees. 

He  graduated  from  Georgia  Institute  of  
Technology with a Bachelor Degree in Civil 
Engineering and obtained a PMD (Program 
for Management Development) from Harvard 
Business School. He is an actual Governor of  
the Urban Land Institute and past Chairman of  
the Board of  Directors of  Península de Cantera 
Project (a government and private nonprofit 
initiative to re-develop the largest remaining 
slum in San Juan), past President of  the Puerto 
Rico chapter of  the National Association of  
Homebuilders, member of  the Georgia Tech 
College of  Engineering Advisory Board, past 
Board Member of  National Fish and Wildlife 
Foundation, Chairman of the Board of  Herencia 
(a nonprofit environmental foundation), and 
Chairman  of   the  Tasis  Foundation  (a  K-12 
educational institution). 

Stubbe personifies the modern-day entrepreneur 
whose concern for the environment has turned 
into a mission. “As developers, we are nothing 
more than an instrument of  the people of  Puerto 
Rico to help create a better society.”

Stubbe personifies 
the modern-day 
entrepreneur whose 
concern for the 
environment has turned 
into a mission. “As 
developers, we are 
nothing more than an 
instrument of the people 
of Puerto Rico to help 
create a better society.”

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION128The
Commissioners

Samuel Abrams – Director of the National 
Center for the Study of Privatization in 
Education, Teachers College, Columbia 
University
Ricardo Álvarez-Díaz – Principal of 
Álvarez-Díaz & Villalon
Félix Aponte Ortiz – Environmental 
Planner and retired professor of the 
Graduate School of Planning of UPR
Luis A. Avilés Vera – Public Health 
Professor at the Medical Sciences Campus  
of UPR
Rafael L. Bras – Provost and Executive Vice 
President of Academic Affairs at Georgia 
Institute of Technology
José “Pepe” Carlo – Professor of Medicine 
at the Medical Sciences Campus of UPR
Daniel Colón Ramos – Founder of Ciencia PR
Lucy Crespo – Executive Director of 
the Puerto Rico Science, Technology & 
Research Trust
José Luis Cruz – President of 
Lehman College
María Enchautegui – Director of the 
Economics Departament of UPR Río Piedras

María Eugenia Ferré Rangel – President of 
Grupo Ferré Rangel
Fernando Lloveras – Executive Director of 
Para la Naturaleza
Jonathan Marvel – Principal of Marvel Architects
Enrique Ortiz de Montellano – President 
and Executive Director of Claro Puerto Rico
Janice Petrovich – Executive Director 
and Vice President of Red de Fundaciones 
de Puerto Rico
Rosibel Recondo – Director of Luis Lloréns 
Torres School
Irwin Redlener – Director of National Center 
for Disaster Preparedness
Nelson Reyes del Valle – Founder of 
Incubadora de MicroEmpresas Comunitarias 
Solidarias (iMECs)
Gualberto Rodríguez III – President of 
Caribbean Produce Exchange
José Rodríguez Baéz – President of the 
Puerto Rico Workers Federation (AFL-CIO)
Josen Rossi – Director of the Institute of 
Competitiveness & Economic Sustainability (ICSE) 
Kathryn Wylde – President of the New York 
City Partnership

APPENDIXES129REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTThe
Secretariat

Malu Blázquez Arsuaga 
Executive Director

Juan A. González Moscoso 
Project Manager

Luis F. Cintrón Piñero 
Project Manager

Alicia Díaz Santiago 
Research & Policy Analyst

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION130Cristina A. Fawaz López
Research & Policy Analyst

Vilmaris Rodríguez 
Administrative Assistant

Héctor M. Cortés Ramírez
Community Outreach & Engagement Manager

APPENDIXES131REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTAppendix B:  
Hurricane Response and Recovery Efforts

1.  Federal Emergency 

Management 
Agency (FEMA)

a.  Community Planning and Capacity Building: 

facilitate support among a variety of partners for 
the planning, capacity, and resilience building 
capabilities needed by local or tribal governments.

2.  U.S. Department of 

Agriculture

i.  Tree Assistance Program: financial assistance to 
tree growers to replant and rehabilitate eligible 
trees and bushes. 

a.  Farm 

Service 
Agency

ii.  Emergency Forest Restoration Program: provides 
payments to owners of rural nonindustrial private 
forest land to restore forest health.

iii.  Assistance for Livestock, Honeybees, and Farm-

Raised Fish: payments to producers to help 
compensate for losses.

iv.  Emergency Conservation Program: provides 
funding to rehabilitate farmland damaged by 
natural disasters. 

v.  Emergency Loan Program: loans to help producers 

recover from production and physical losses. 

vi.  Noninsured Crop Disaster Assistance Program: 

financial assistance for no insurable crop losses.   

vii.  Livestock Indemnity Program: provides benefits 
to livestock owners and some contract growers 
for livestock deaths in excess of normal mortality 
that are direct result of adverse weather events.    

Federal Recovery EffortsRESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION1323.  U.S. Army Corps 

of Engineers

b. 

(9/24/17) In 
coordination with 
National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric 
Administration 
(NOAA): survey 
damaged 
channels and 
ports in PR. 

4.  U.S. Department 

of Health and 
Human Services 

5.  U.S. Department 

of Interior

6.  U.S. Department 

of Commerce

7.  U.S. Department of 
Energy & Western 
Area Power 
Administration

8.  U.S. Department of 
Housing and Urban 
Development (HUD)

9.  Federal Highway 

Administration

a. 

Infrastructure Systems: facilitate the restoration 
of infrastructure systems and services to support 
viable, sustainable communities and improve 
resilience to, and protect from, future hazards. 

i.  Operation Blue Roof.

ii.  Several temporary power 

installations.  

a.  Health and Social Services: support locally led 

recovery efforts to address public health, health 
care facilities and coalitions, and essential 
human services. 

a.  Natural and Cultural Resources: work with 

communities wishing to preserve, protect, and 
restore natural and cultural resources, such as 
historic structures. 

a.  Economic Recovery: assist with sustaining 
or restoring business and employment in 
the affected area and developing economic 
opportunities in these communities (SBA). 

a.  8-member advance team deployed in PR.

a.  Housing: develop adequate, affordable, and 

accessible housing solutions for Hurricane 
Maria survivors. 

a.  9/29/17: made $40m available to PR Highways 

and Transportation Authority for emergency relief 
work to impacted roads.

APPENDIXESFederal Recovery Efforts133REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT1.  Profamilias

a.  Clinic services on sexual and reproductive health 

(San Juan) 

2.  Proyecto 

Intercambios

a.  Focused on eradicating HIV, Hep-C, and improving 

drug users’ human rights to be healthy, access to 
housing, and social inclusion. 

3.  Proyecto Matria

4.  Red de 

Fundaciones

5.  Casa Pueblo

a.  Support for the development and self-sufficiency of 
Puerto Rican women, victims of domestic violence, 
through housing options and access to education, 
psychological services (Island wide). 

b.  Has delivered food, water, and supplies throughout 

the island (particularly in center of the island and 
west coast). 

a.  Fundación Angel Ramos: supports NGOs 

island wide.

b.  ADELANTE Puerto Rico: funds and supports 

NGOs to recover PR in the short, medium, 
and long term; focuses on transparency in 
government, inequality, and economic and 
community development (Island wide). 

a.  Community-based organization that promotes, 

through voluntary participation of individuals and 
groups, protection of environmental and cultural 
resources (Based in Adjuntas, PR). 

b.  Post-María: Solar powered lamps in Adjuntas, 
Utuado, Lares, Peñuelas, Ponce sent via postal 
service from U.S. diaspora; radio communication 
across the island and U.S. has helped connect/
notify family members. 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION134Recovery Efforts by Puerto Rican NGOs6.  Resilient Power 

Puerto Rico

a.  Phase 1: Relief Hubs: mobile solar-electric 

systems targeted to the most remote ad hardest-
hit communities (under-served communities).

b.  Phase 2: 100 Solar Towns: goal to deliver 100 

mobile solar-electric kits by end of 2017. A 
solar hub in each municipality and train local 
residents during the installation (under-served 
communities).

c.  Phase 3: extend through 2021 – promotes solar 

electric energy for every household (Island wide). 

7.  P.E.C.E.S.

a.  Fosters social, economic, educational development 

of individuals and communities in social 
disadvantage. Expertise in education of at-risk youth 
(began in Punta Santiago, Humacao and expanded 
services to the eastern region of PR).

8.  Espacios Abiertos

a.  Promote citizen participation and transparency in 

social, political, and economic processes (Island wide). 

9.  Center for a 
New Economy

a.  CNE Growth Commission for Puerto Rico

b.  Developing policy options for jumpstarting Puerto 

Rico’s economy (reach in 65 municipalities; 11 
permanent distribution centers). 

10. Boys and Girls Club 

of Puerto Rico

a.  Reach in 13 municipalities.

APPENDIXES135REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTRecovery Efforts by Puerto Rican NGOs11. María Fund

a.  Reach in 13 

municipalities.

i.  Environmental restoration and social justice 

initiative consists of public and private community 
organizations working together so that 8 
communities on both sides of Caño Martín Peña 
overcome poverty and are not displaced during 
and after dredging (G-8 Inc: Leaders from the 8 
communities in the area).

b.  Organización 

i.  Environmental restoration and social justice 

Boricua de 
Agricultura 
Ecológica

initiative consists of public and private community 
organizations working together so that 8 
communities on both sides of Caño Martín Peña 
overcome poverty and are not displaced during 
and after dredging (G-8 Inc: Leaders from the 8 
communities in the area).

i.  Desde Abajo: integrates the production and 

compilation of informational content for the public; 
cooperates with platforms to extend impact.

c.  CDPEC

ii.  Radio Móvil: messaging on wheels

d.  Taller Salud

iii.  Center for Political, Educational and Cultural 

Development: food distribution and social activism 
(Caguas & Cayey). 

i.  Focuses on education and prevention in areas of 

sexual and reproductive rights in Puerto Rico (works 
mostly with women and girls in Loíza). 

ii.  Post-María: volunteer brigades to interview 

refugees to know in detail the immediate needs 
of the people.

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION136Recovery Efforts by Puerto Rican NGOs1.  Department 

of Justice

2.  Department of 
Transportation

a.  Adopt an elderly home 

b.  Announcement of the Emergency Legal Fund 

a.  Marking pavement works

b.  Repair of traffic lights, road patching, bridges, etc.

c.  Repair and installment of barriers

3.  Puerto Rico 

Electric Power 
Authority (PREPA)

a.  Repair and replacement of power lines and poles

b.  Rehabilitation and repair of electrical substations

4.  Puerto Rico 

Aqueducts and 
Sewers Authority 
(PRASA)

5.  Department 
of Agriculture

6.  Department 
of Treasury

c.  U.S. Support Effort Staff

a.  Repair of potable water pipes and lines

b.  Water plant repair and water pumping 

station treatment 

c.  Maintenance work for filter plants

d.  Creation of Oasis’ and portable truck water tanks

a.  Joint Resolution of the Senate 175

b.  Restoration of mills and machinery for industries 

of agriculture and livestock

a.  Exemption from IVU payments for small and 
medium-sized merchants: Nov. 20 – Dec. 31

b.  100% exemption of any tax to all donations that 

enter PR

APPENDIXES137REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTGovernemnt Response & Recovery Efforts (Puerto Rico & Municipal)7.  Fiscal Agency 
and Financial 
Advisory (FAFAA) 

8.  Department 
of Economic 
Development and 
Commerce (DDEC)

a.  Executive Order to create the Office of Central 

Recovery and Reconstruction for Puerto Rico 

a.  Co.Lab: Bayamón, Caguas, Hato Rey, Mayaguez, 

Rio Piedras & Santurce

c.  Labor Development Program

b.  Economic Recovery Program 

d.  Business Impulse Tour

9.  Puerto Rico Police

a.  Maintained security and control on roads and 

traffic lights

b.  Used transportation resources to deliver necessities 

to remote areas with no access

a.  Massive vaccination campaign around the island

10. Department 

of Health

b.  Pharmacies do not require clearance for 

immediate dispatch of medication 

c.  Aspersion plan in the necessary municipalities

11. Department 

of Housing

a.  Tu Hogar Renace

b.  Collaborations with the Association of PR 

Contractors for housing reconstruction 

12. Public Buildings 

Authority

a.  School inspection to accelerate reopening in 

collaboration with OMEP 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION138Governemnt Response & Recovery Efforts (Puerto Rico & Municipal)13. Department 
of Education

a.  Alliance with the Association of School 

Psychologists

b.  San Juan Bay Estuary 

14. Environmental 
Quality Boards

a. 

Issues permits for electrical power generators of 
more than 10kw

b.  Establish centers for the recycling of Christmas 

trees

c.  Removal of affected boats and ships

15. Ports Authority

a.  Store humanitarian air containers 

16. Solid Waste 

Authority 

a.  Vegetative Material Diversion Pan 

b.  Bring your Batteries to Recycle

c.  Debris management and disposition

d.  Community Deposit Centers

e.  Establish centers for the recycling of Christmas trees

f.  Removal of affected boats and ships

17. Department 

of Natural and 
Environmental 
Resources

a.  Debris removal and wedding

b.  Establish centers for the recycling of Christmas trees

c.  Removal of affected boats and ships

APPENDIXES139REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTGovernemnt Response & Recovery Efforts (Puerto Rico & Municipal)Appendix C:  
Working Group Sector Reports

To find the Sector Reports, refer to Resilient Puerto Rico Advisory 
Commission's website  (www.resilientpuertorico.org).

Housing

Energy

Physical  

Infrastructure 

Health, Education 
& Social Services

Economic  
Development

Natural  

Infrastructure

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION140Utuado, PR. Angel Xavier Viera-VargasAPPENDIXES141REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORTGlossary

Disaster  
Severe  alterations  in  the  normal  functioning  of   a 
community or society due to hazardous physical events 
interacting with vulnerable social conditions, leading 
to widespread adverse human, material, economic, 
or  environmental  effects  that  require  immediate 
emergency response to satisfy critical human needs and 
that may require external support for recovery.

Effectiveness 
The degree to which something is successful in producing 
an intended or expected result, success or purpose.

Efficiency 
Performing or functioning in the best possible manner 
with the least waste of  time and effort.

Emergency preparedness 
Actions  taken  to  plan,  organize,  equip,  train,  and 
exercise with the objective of  building and sustaining 
the capabilities necessary to prevent, protect against, 
mitigate the effects of, respond to, and recover from 
those threats that pose the greatest risk. 

Exposure 
The presence of  people, livelihoods, environmental 
services and resources, infrastructure, or economic, social, 
or cultural assets in places that could be adversely affected.

knowledge and technologies, as needed. It also means 
considering and incorporating indigenous or traditional 
knowledge and practices in new ways.

Flood risk management 
Processes for designing, implementing, and evaluating 
strategies,  policies,  and  measures  to  improve  the 
understanding of  flood risk, foster flood risk reduction 
and transfer, and promote continuous improvement in 
flood preparedness, response, and recovery practices. 
They have the explicit purpose of reducing the likelihood 
and/or the impact of  floods in order to prevent the loss 
of  properties, assets and life caused by floods. 

Geographic Information System (GIS) 
A framework for gathering, managing, and analyzing 
data and spatial location. It uses maps to organize layers 
of  information into visualizations. Rooted in the science 
of  geography, GIS integrates many types of  data. 

Governance 
Structures  and  processes  designed  to  ensure 
accountability, transparency, responsiveness, rule of  law, 
stability, equity and inclusiveness, empowerment, and 
broad-based participation. Governance also represents 
the norms, values, and rules of  the game through 
which public affairs are managed in a manner that is 
transparent, participatory, inclusive, and responsive.

Flexibility 
Flexibility implies that systems can change, evolve and 
adapt in response to changing circumstances. This 
may favor decentralized and modular approaches to 
infrastructure or ecosystem management. Flexibility 
can  be  achieved  through  the  introduction  of   new 

Grant Programs 
Programs that provide a sum of  money given by a 
government or other organization for a particular 
purpose. These programs are discretionary or formula 
grants and/or cooperative agreements administered by 
a federal agency.

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION142GLOSSARY

Inclusive 
Emphasizes  the  need  for  consultation  and 
commitment of  communities, including the most 
vulnerable groups. An inclusive approach contributes 
to a sense of  shared ownership or a joint vision to 
build resilience.

Infrastructure 
Set  of   works  and  services  that  are  considered 
fundamental and necessary for the establishment and 
operation of  an activity. These include communication 
systems, aqueducts and sewers, electricity, telephone 
and health facilities, education, and recreation. 

of  its members, individuals, or institutions. It is not 
created by a government, but it may work cooperatively 
with government. Such organizations serve a public 
purpose, not a private benefit.

Nonprofit Organization 
A tax-exempt organization that serves the public interest. 
In general, the purpose of  this type of  organization 
must be charitable, educational, scientific, religious, 
or literary. It does not declare a profit and utilizes all 
revenue, available after normal operating expenses, 
in service to the public interest. This organization is a 
501(c)(3) or a 501(c)(4) designate.

Integrated 
Integration and alignment between systems promotes 
consistency in decision-making and ensures that all 
investments are mutually supportive to a common 
outcome. Integration is evident within and between 
resilient systems and across different scales of  their 
operations.  Exchange  of   information  between 
systems enables them to function collectively and 
respond  rapidly  through  shorter  feedback  loops 
throughout society.

Mitigation (for risk) 
The lessening of  the potential adverse impacts of  
physical hazards (including those that are human-
induced) through actions that reduce hazard, exposure, 
and  vulnerability.  (for  Climate  Change)  A  human 
intervention to reduce the sources or enhance the sinks 
of  greenhouse gases.

Non-governmental Organization (NGO) 
An entity with an association that is based on interests 

Public-Private Partnerships  
A cooperative arrangement between two or more public 
and private entities, typically of  a long-term nature. 
These partnerships between a government agency and 
private-sector company can be used to finance, build, 
and operate projects, such as public transportation 
networks, parks, and convention centers. 

Reconstruction 
The  reconstruction  or  replacement  of   permanent 
residential,  commercial,  or  industrial  facilities 
damaged or destroyed in a major disaster, as well as 
the construction of  public or private infrastructure at 
large scale, the addition of  community improvements, 
and/or the restoration of  a healthy economy.

Recovery 
Disaster  recovery  is  the  phase  of   the  emergency 
management cycle that begins with the stabilization 
of  the incident and ends when the community has 
recovered from the impacts of  the disaster.

REIMAGINA PUERTO RICO REPORT143Redundant 
Refers  to  spare  capacity  purposely  created  within 
systems so that they can accommodate disruption, 
extreme pressures, or surges in demand. It includes 
diversity: the presence of  multiple ways to achieve a 
given need or fulfill a particular function. Examples 
include distributed infrastructure networks and resource 
reserves. Redundancies should be intentional, cost-
effective, and prioritized at a society scale.

Reflective
Accepts the inherent and ever-increasing uncertainty 
and change in today’s world. Reflective systems have 
mechanisms  to  continuously  evolve  and  modify 
standards or norms based on emerging evidence, rather 
than seeking permanent solutions based on the status 
quo. As a result, people and institutions examine and 
systematically learn from their past experiences and 
leverage this learning to inform future decision-making.

Regulatory frameworks 
Frameworks that provide the base on which institutions 
build and determine the scope and nature of participation 
in society. It is a complex combination of  statutes and 
legal regulations, judicial rules, and actual practice.

Resilience
The capacity of  individuals, communities, institutions, 
businesses, and systems to survive, adapt and thrive no 
matter what stresses or shocks they encounter.

Resilience dividend
The net social, economic, and physical benefits achieved 
when designing initiatives and projects in a forward 
looking, risk-aware, inclusive, and integrated way.

Resourceful 
Implies that people and institutions are able to rapidly 
find different ways to achieve their goals or meet their 

needs during a shock or when under stress. This may 
include  investing  in  capacity  to  anticipate  future 
conditions, set priorities, and respond, for example, 
by  mobilizing  and  coordinating  wider  human, 
financial  and  physical  resources.  Resourcefulness 
is  instrumental  to  a  society’s  ability  to  restore 
functionality of  critical systems, potentially under 
severely constrained conditions.

Risk
Potential consequences in which something of  value 
is in danger with an uncertain outcome, recognizing 
the diversity of  values. Often, risk is represented as the 
probability of  occurrence of  dangerous events or trends 
multiplied by the impacts in case such events or trends 
occur. Risks result from the interaction of  vulnerability, 
exposure, and danger.

Risk assessment
The  determination  of   quantitative  or  qualitative 
estimates of  risk related to a well-defined situation and 
a recognized threat or hazard. The assessment includes 
the calculations of  the risk magnitude, potential loss,  
and the probability that the loss will occur. 

Robust
Robust systems include well-conceived, constructed and 
managed physical assets that can withstand the impacts 
of  hazard events without significant damage or loss of  
function. Robust designs anticipate potential system 
failures and ensure failure is predictable, safe, and not 
disproportionate to the cause.

Sea level rise
An increase in global mean sea level as a result of  an 
increase in the volume of  water in the world’s oceans. 
The  two  major  causes  of   global  sea  level  rise  are 
thermal expansion caused by warming of  the ocean 
(since water expands as it warms) and increased melting 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION144of  land-based ice, such as glaciers and ice sheets.

Shock
Sudden,  sharp  events  that  threaten  a  society, 
including earthquakes, floods, disease outbreaks, and 
terrorist attacks.

Susceptibility 
Society's and ecosystems' predisposition to suffer as a 
result of  intrinsic and contextual conditions that make 
it plausible for such systems to collapse or experience 
damage due to the influence of  a dangerous event.

Sustainable development
Development that meets the needs of  the present 
without compromising the ability of  future generations 
to meet their own needs. Sustainability has emerged 
as  the  guiding  principle  for  long-term  global 
development. Consisting of  three pillars, sustainable 
development seeks to achieve, in a balanced manner, 
economic  development,  social  development,  and 
environmental protection.

Unmet needs
The needs of  communities or families that have not 
been attended by federal government institutions as a 
result of  a disaster.

Vulnerability
The  propensity  or  predisposition  to  be  adversely 
affected. Vulnerability comprises a variety of  concepts 
and elements that include sensitivity or susceptibility to 
harm and lack of  responsiveness and adaptation.

Vulnerable populations 
Groups and communities at higher risk as a result of  
barriers they experience to social, economic, political 
and environmental resources, as well as limitations due 
to illness or disability.

GLOSSARY

San Juan, PR. AI R

Endnotes & 
References

1.  Government of  Puerto Rico. (2017). Build Back Better Puerto Rico. 
Retrieved from https://www.governor.ny.gov/sites/governor.ny.gov/
files/atoms/files/Build_Back_Better_PR.pdf

2. 

Ibid.

3. 

Ibid.

4. 

Ibid.

to impose a seven-member Financial Oversight and Management Board 
(FOMB) to deal with the Puerto Rico crisis. The President of the United 
States appointed seven members to the Board and the Governor of Puerto 
Rico designated one ex officio member. https://juntasupervision.pr.gov/
index.php/en/home/

13.  Red  de  Fundaciones  de  Puerto  Rico.  (2015)  May.  Estudio  de  las 
organizaciones sin fines de lucro en Puerto Rico. Retrieved from http://
redfundacionespr.org/

5.  Pasch, R.J et al. (2018). National Hurricane Center Tropical Cyclone 
Report: Hurricane Maria (AL 152017). Retrieved from https://www.
nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL152017_Maria.pdf

14.  ReImagina  Puerto  Rico.  (2018).  Resumen  de  actividades 
de  participación  ciudadana.  Retrieved  from  http://www.
resilientpuertorico.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/20180403_
Resumen-de-las-Actividades-V2.pdf

6.  100 Resilient Cities. (2018). 100 Resilient Cities website. Retrieved from 

http://www.100resilientcities.org/

7.  Puerto Rico Department of  State. (2017). Executive Orders. Retrieved 

from https://estado.pr.gov/en/executive-orders/

8.  Center for Puerto Rican Studies. (2018). Puerto Rico Post Maria Report. 
Retrieved from https://centropr.hunter.cuny.edu/events-news/rebuild-
puerto-rico/puerto-rico-post-maria-report

9.  Estudios Técnicos, Inc. (2018). Puerto Rico: A New Reality.

10.  United  States  Census  Bureau.  (2017).  Household  Income  2016: 
American Community Survey Briefs. Retrieved from https://census.gov/
content/dam/Census/library/publications/2017/acs/acsbr16-02.pdf.

11.  Estudios Técnicos, Inc. (2018). Puerto Rico: A New Reality.

15.  Center for Puerto Rican Studies. (2018). Puerto Rico Post Maria Report. 
Retrieved from https://centropr.hunter.cuny.edu/events-news/rebuild-
puerto-rico/puerto-rico-post-maria-report 

16.  100 Resilient Cities. (2018). 100 Resilient Cities website. Retrieved from 

http://100resilientcities.org/resources/#section-1 

17.  Unified New Orleans Plan. The Unified New Orleans Plan. (2007). 

Retrieved from https://nolaplans.com/unop/ 

18.  The NYS 2100 Commission. (2013). Recommendations to Improve the 
Strength and Resilience. Retrieved from https://www.dos.ny.gov/opd/
sser/pdf/NYS%202100%20Report.pdf

19.  United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. (2013). 
Hurricane Sandy Rebuilding Strategy. Retrieved from https://www.hud.
gov/sites/documents/HSREBUILDINGSTRATEGY.PDF 

12.  The bankruptcy, which was made possible under Title III of PROMESA 
Law, and enacted by Congress on June 30, 2016, allowed the U.S. Congress 

20.  Philanthropy  New  York.  (2008),  April.  Best  Practices  in  Disaster 

RESILIENT PUERTO RICO ADVISORY COMMISSION146ENDNOTES & REFERENCES

Orocovis, PR. AI R

Grantmaking: Lessons from the Gulf  Coast. Retrieved from https://
philanthropynewyork.org/sites/default/files/resources/Best%20
Practices%20in%20Disaster%20Grantmaking.PDF 

21.  Administrative Conference of  the United States. (2012). Improving 
coordination  of   related  agency  responsibilities:  Administrative 
Conference  Recommendation  2012-5.  Retrieved  from  https://
www.acus.gov/sites/default/files/Final-Recommendation-2012-5-
Improving-Agency-Coordination.pdf

22.  According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, 
the term "heat island" describes built up areas that are hotter than 
nearby rural areas. The annual mean air temperature of  a city with 
1 million people or more can be 1.8–5.4°F (1–3°C) warmer than 
its surroundings. In the evening, the difference can be as high as 
22°F (12°C). Heat islands can affect communities by increasing 
summertime peak energy demand, air conditioning costs, air pollution 
and greenhouse gas emissions, heat-related illness and mortality, and 
water quality. Please refer to the following homepage: https://www.
epa.gov/heat-islands 

23.  Federal Emergency Management Agency. (2016), June. National 
Disaster Recovery Framework. Retrieved from https://www.fema.gov/
media-library-data/1466014998123-4bec8550930f774269e0c5968b1
20ba2/National_Disaster_Recovery_Framework2nd.pdf

24.  Arup and Rockefeller Foundation. (2015). City Resilience Index. 
Retrieved  from  https://assets.rockefellerfoundation.org/app/
uploads/20160105134829/100RC-City-Resilience-Framework.
pdf   and:  https://assets.rockefellerfoundation.org/app/
uploads/20140410162455/City-Resilience-Framework-2015.pdf  

25.  h t t p s : / / w w w. c o n g re s s. g ov / 1 1 5 / b i l l s / h r 1 8 9 2 / B I L L S -

115hr1892enr.pdf

reimaginapuertorico

info@resilientpuertorico.org

http://www.reimaginapuertorico.org

