One New York
The Plan for a Strong  
and Just City

The City of New York
Mayor Bill de Blasio

Anthony Shorris 
First Deputy Mayor

Table of Contents

Letter from the Mayor  2

Executive Summary  4

Introduction and Evolution  8

New York City: Today and Tomorrow  22

Vision 1: Our Growing, Thriving City  44

50  

Industry Expansion & Cultivation 

58   Workforce Development 

66  

74  

78  

84  

Housing 

Thriving Neighborhoods 

Culture 

Transportation 

100  

Infrastructure Planning & Management 

108   Broadband 

Vision 2: Our Just and Equitable City  112

120   Early Childhood 

126  

Integrated Government & Social Services 

132   Healthy Neighborhoods, Active Living 

142   Healthcare Access 

150   Criminal Justice Reform 

156   Vision Zero 

Vision 3: Our Sustainable City  160

166  

80 x 50 

176   Zero Waste 

188   Air Quality 

194   Brownfields 

200   Water Management 

206  

Parks & Natural Resources 

Vision 4: Our Resilient City  214

222   Neighborhoods 

230   Buildings 

236  

Infrastructure 

244   Coastal Defense 

Diverse and Inclusive Government  252

Appendix  262

266  

280  

316  

Summary of Initiatives

2011 Sustainability Initiatives 

2013 Resiliency Initiatives 

344   References 

347   Glossary 

349   Acknowledgments 

Letter from  
the Mayor

2

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City nyc.gov/onenycFriends,

For generations, New York City has been the place where people from across the 
globe have come to realize their dreams. However, today, rising inequality makes it 
difficult for so many New Yorkers to live here and raise their families with dignity. 

With the launch of One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City, we build on 
New York City’s global leadership when it comes to growth, sustainability, and 
resiliency—and embrace equity as central to that work. 

We know the challenges facing New York City as we approach the start of our fifth 
century. OneNYC sets out what we need to do to make our city stronger, our people 
better prepared for jobs in the 21st century economy, our government more 
responsive, and our communities able to withstand the existential threat posed by 
climate change. 

It is a blueprint of the New York City we want our children to inherit. The actions 
we take now will ensure we have a dynamic, inclusive economy, a healthier 
environment, more affordable housing, and more reliable and resilient 
infrastructure. With this work, we will be prepared for the shocks and stresses 
ahead, and have the ability to bounce back stronger.

OneNYC is ambitious, setting clear and aggressive goals. Our initiatives address 
every aspect of life in New York City—how we live, work, learn, and play, raise our 
children, and enjoy all our city has to offer. Achieving these goals requires nothing 
less than bold, innovative solutions. 

We will meet the challenges we face today and in the future—as New Yorkers have 
always done—and inspire other cities around the world to do the same.

We are committed to building a stronger, sustainable, resilient, and equitable  
city—OneNYC.

Mayor Bill de Blasio

3

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City nyc.gov/onenycExecutive 
Summary

4

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City nyc.gov/onenycTen years from now, New York City will enter its fifth century.

As we look ahead, we are asking critical questions about New York: what do we want 
our city to be in ten years, twenty years, and beyond? What kind of city do we want 
to pass on to our children—and to the generations to come?

This plan is our roadmap that will preserve and enhance New York City’s role as a 
leading global city. As with past iterations of this report, we focus on economic 
growth, sustainability, and resiliency. But we also seek to address issues of equity for 
our residents—because we must serve all New Yorkers.

The bold initiatives we launch in OneNYC will speak to these challenges and 
articulate the goals and long-term agenda of the de Blasio Administration. They 
build on previous sustainability plans, as well as on the initiatives we have 
announced over the past year regarding affordable housing, pre-kindergarten 
education, the reduction of traffic fatalities, the fight against climate change, 
bolstering our coastal communities, reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and 
economic development.

The plan lays down clear markers we will fight for, and sets out a comprehensive 
blueprint to prepare New York City for the future. We envision a dynamic, thriving 
economy, a city that is a responsible steward of the environment, and that is resilient 
against shocks both natural and man-made. We have made equity an explicit guiding 
principle—a lens through which we view all of our planning, policymaking, and 
governing. Equity means we ensure that every New Yorker has equal access to 
opportunities to reach his or her full potential and to succeed.

Our Vision for New York City

We have organized our vision for New York City’s fifth century around principles of 
growth, equity, sustainability, and resiliency.

Our Growing, Thriving City
New York City will continue to be the world’s most dynamic urban economy 
where families, businesses, and neighborhoods thrive.

To meet the needs of a growing population at a time of rising housing costs, the City 
will implement the nation’s most ambitious program for the creation and 
preservation of affordable housing. The City will support a first-class, 21st century 
commercial sector. It will foster job growth, and build an inclusive workforce by 
focusing investment in training in high-growth industries, as well as programs that 
provide skills to the hardest-to-employ. We will support the burgeoning innovation 
economy, create new high-speed wireless networks, and invest in transportation 
infrastructure. As a regional hub, we will work closely with our neighbors on issues 
including transportation, housing, and jobs.

5

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City nyc.gov/onenycOur Just and Equitable City
New York City will have an inclusive, equitable economy that offers well-paying 
jobs and opportunity for all to live with dignity and security.

With the measures in OneNYC, the City will lift 800,000 New Yorkers out of poverty 
or near poverty by 2025. We will do this by fighting to raise the minimum wage, and 
launching high-impact initiatives to support education and job growth. We will seek 
to reduce premature mortality by 25 percent by ensuring that all New Yorkers have 
access to physical and mental healthcare services and addressing hazards in our 
homes. We will expand Family Justice Centers to help victims of domestic violence. 
We will promote the citywide integration of government services, information, and 
community data.

Our Sustainable City
New York City will be the most sustainable big city in the world and a global 
leader in the fight against climate change.

We will strive to minimize our environmental footprint, reduce dangerous greenhouse 
gas emissions, and have the cleanest air and water. The City is building on its goal to 
reduce greenhouse gases by 80 percent by 2050 (80 x 50)—the largest city in the world 
to make that commitment—by expanding from an initial focus on buildings to 
including energy supply, transportation, and solid waste as part of a comprehensive 
action plan to reach our goal. We are committing to a goal of Zero Waste to landfills by 
2030. We will keep organics out of the landfill, which will also cut greenhouse gas 
emissions. The City will make major investments to remediate contaminated land, and 
ensure that underserved New Yorkers have more access to parks.

Our Resilient City
Our neighborhoods, economy, and public services are ready to withstand 
and emerge stronger from the impacts of climate change and other 21st 
century threats.

As a resilient city, New York will be able to respond to adverse events like Hurricane 
Sandy, deliver basic functions and services to all residents, and emerge stronger as a 
community—with the goal of eliminating long-term displacement from homes and 
jobs after shock events by 2050. The City will upgrade private and public buildings 
to be more energy efficient and resilient to the impacts of climate change; adapt 
infrastructure like transportation, telecommunications, water, and energy to 
withstand severe weather events; and strengthen our coastal defenses against 
flooding and sea level rise. We will strengthen homes, businesses, community-based 
organizations, and public services to reduce the impacts of disruptive events and 
promote faster recovery.

6

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City nyc.gov/onenycNew Challenges

The challenges of our fifth century will be as profound as those we’ve seen in the 
past. Despite widespread prosperity, living costs and income inequality in New York 
City are rising. Poverty and homelessness remain high. The city’s core 
infrastructure—our roads, subways, sewers, and bridges—is aging. Affordable 
housing is in short supply. Our air and water have never been cleaner, but our parks 
and public spaces don’t always serve the needs of all New Yorkers. And, without 
action, climate change is an existential threat to our future.

OneNYC is based on ideas coming from thousands of New Yorkers. We asked civic, 
community, and business leaders what they thought we should be doing. We heard 
from everyday New Yorkers—at town hall meetings and online, in polls and 
surveys—who told us about what works and what could be better in their lives, and 
what they imagine for New York’s future. We worked with over 70 City agencies and 
offices and many regional partners. As we implement this plan, we will continue to 
engage with New Yorkers. We will seek their opinions and suggestions about how to 
make our city better.

We will fight for New York to retain and enhance its status as a global leader—in 
commerce, culture, trade, innovation, sustainability, climate resiliency, and more. We 
will ensure that New York will always be a place where people can realize their 
dreams on the world’s biggest stage, as generations have done in the past, and that 
everyone has the opportunity to succeed.

The initiatives we announce today in OneNYC are far-reaching, but also realistic, 
and will prepare New York City for the challenges we face today and in the years 
ahead. By focusing our efforts on growth, equity, sustainability, and resiliency, we 
will ensure that the city’s fifth century will be our strongest yet.

7

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City nyc.gov/onenycIntroduction  
and Evolution

8

Introduction and Evolutionnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Introduction and Evolution

New York City is the place where people come to realize their dreams. It’s a city where 
people are determined to create a new and better life for themselves and their families. 
Sometimes gritty and in many ways grand, and always pulsing with a mix of symphonies, 
salsa, Broadway show tunes and street music, New York is both a global city—the 
preeminent center of commerce and culture—and one of small, vibrant neighborhoods.

Ten years from now, New York City will celebrate its 400th anniversary. OneNYC is 
the first step in creating a living and breathing plan for New York’s fifth century – a 
vision of our city as a place where New Yorkers of today and tomorrow have the 
opportunity to thrive and succeed. 

When PlaNYC was first released in 2007, the recession had not yet begun, nor had 
Sandy hit our shores. We are living in a different city today, and different times 
demand different approaches.

We now face multiple crises that threaten the very fabric of our city: climate change 
continues to threaten our future in a host of ways, while growing inequality gaps 
create other challenges. OneNYC lays out our approaches to dealing with income 
inequality along with our plans for managing climate change, all the while 
establishing the platform for yet another century of economic growth and vitality for 
this world capital.

Throughout our history, we have built a better New York City together

1821
Erie Canal  
opened

1886
First settlement 
house founded

1903
First IRT 
subway line 
constructed

1964
Verrazano-
Narrows Bridge 
opened

1625
New 
Amsterdam 
established 

1866
Metropolitan Board  
of Health,  
now DOHMH, created 

1895
NY Public Library 
established

1915
Catskill System, 
including the Ashokan 
Reservoir and Catskill 
Aqueduct, completed

2014
One World 
Trade Center 
opened

9

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City These challenges reach beyond the five boroughs.

New York City is the engine of the region’s economy and its population center. It is 
at the center of the impact of climate change and the need for a responsible 
environmental policy. And inequality casts a shadow over the entire region, not just 
New York City itself. For all these reasons, we have the responsibility to fight for 
solutions to the challenges that we confront as a region.

OneNYC is the first step in bringing together government at every level, 
neighborhood organizations, and the private sector to tackle these crises.

OneNYC charts a course for a sustainable and resilient city for all its residents, and 
addresses the profound social, economic, and environmental issues that we face. 
Through OneNYC, we pledge to keep the promise of opportunity that has made our 
city such a remarkable place for so many generations.

OneNYC is what New Yorkers need now and for the next century. We recognize that 
we do not control all the levers and cannot alone eliminate poverty or greenhouse 
gas emissions. So we will engage the private sector, rally our people, and leverage 
our strength as a region, while committing the significant tools at our disposal, to 
meet our goals.

We cannot fix what is before us overnight. But we can lead the way. OneNYC is the 
first step.

10

Introduction and Evolutionnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Meeting Past Challenges

We’ve done this before. New Yorkers have a long and proud tradition 
of confronting tough issues head on, with determination and heart, and 
having the skills to get the job done. Through it all, we have remained a 
city of tolerance and diversity, one that has drawn people from around 
the world since our origins as a Dutch settlement. Our government has 
a noble history of innovating urban policies that have been adopted 
across the country and around the world. We created the first fire 
districts and a Board of Health committed to eradicating cholera and 
other epidemics. We devised a system of reservoirs to bring water to 
the city and engaged creative designers to build great public parks. We 
created a citywide zoning ordinance that became a worldwide model. 
We pioneered school meals programs, settlement houses for a booming 
immigrant population, and social programs that became a template for 
the New Deal and the Great Society. Today, we are leading the way in 
curbing greenhouse gas emissions and preparing for climate change.

PlaNYC 2007-2013
In 2007, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg released the first PlaNYC, which 
focused on responsibly meeting the city’s growing population and 
infrastructure needs. Titled A Greener, Greater New York, it included the 
City’s initial sustainability strategy, and became the model for other large 
global cities. PlaNYC outlined measures to address the city’s aging 
infrastructure, support parks, improve the quality of life and health for 
New Yorkers, and for the first time ever, commit to a goal for reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions. PlaNYC 2011 expanded on these initiatives by 
strengthening the City’s commitment to environmental stability and 
livable neighborhoods, launching brownfield cleanups, and improving 
the quality of our air and water.

In 2013, after Hurricane Sandy, the City released PlaNYC: A Stronger, 
More Resilient New York, which documented the lessons learned from 
Sandy, developed a strategy for the city to build back, and developed 
recommendations to adapt the city to the projected impacts of climate 
change, including rising sea levels and extreme weather events. 

PlaNYC Progress
Since the first PlaNYC in 2007, the City has made considerable progress 
on reaching its goals. We have reduced greenhouse gas emissions 19 
percent since 2005, invested billions of dollars to protect our water 
supply, planted nearly a million trees, installed 300 miles of bike lanes, 
and passed regulations and developed programs to phase out polluting 
heating oils. The City also strengthened coastal defenses, fortified 
crucial infrastructure such as wastewater treatment facilities, and 
worked to make buildings and neighborhoods more resilient. 

11

The City of New York
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg

2007

UPDATE APril 2011

NEW YOrK

The City of New York
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg

2011

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A  STRONGER, 
MORE RESILIENT 
NEW YORK

2013

Introduction and Evolutionnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Building on  
a Solid Foundation 
In its first year, the de Blasio administration 
presented a series of long-term goals and 
strategies, and launched comprehensive 
initiatives across City agencies. These 
initiatives have already begun to show 
results. OneNYC builds upon these 
initiatives as a launching point for the 
ambitious goals set forth in this plan.

One City
Built to Last 

The City of New York
Mayor Bill de Blasio
Mayor’s Office of Long-Term Planning and Sustainability
Anthony Shorris, First Deputy Mayor

I

Running Head Here

Vision Zero

Action Plan City of New York 

Mayor Bill de Blasio 2014

Pre-K for All 
A plan to create a truly universal 
pre-kindergarten system, with a 
seat in a high-quality pre-kinder-
garten class for all four-year-olds 
in need of such services.

Vision Zero 
A plan that commits the City to 
using every tool at its disposal to 
improve the safety of our streets 
and to reduce traffic fatalities 
to zero.

ONE CITY, REBUILDING TOGETHER

A Report on the City of New York’s Response to Hurricane Sandy and the Path Forward

Prepared by:
William Goldstein, Senior Advisor for Recovery, Resiliency and Infrastructure
Amy Peterson, Director of the Housing Recovery Office
Daniel A. Zarrilli, Director of the Mayor’s Office of Recovery and Resiliency

APRIL 2014

1

One City, Rebuilding Together

1

One City: Built to Last 
The City’s commitment to cut 
its greenhouse gas emissions 
80 percent by 2050 focusing on 
reductions in buildings, which 
are responsible for nearly three 
quarters of the city’s contribution 
to climate change.

Housing New York
An ambitious ten-year plan that 
addresses New York’s housing 
crisis by building our next gener-
ation of affordable housing and 
supporting the quality of life in 
our neighborhoods.

Career Pathways
A plan to create a more compre-
hensive, integrated workforce 
development system and policy 
framework focused on skills 
building and job quality.

One City, Rebuilding 
Together
A plan to overhaul the Build It Back 
program to accelerate the Sandy 
recovery process for homeowners 
and establish targets for reimburse-
ments and construction starts. Also 
established a first-ever Mayor’s 
Office of Recovery and Resiliency 
to lead the City’s climate adaptation 
and resiliency program.

INITIATIVES LAUNCHED IN 2014

12

Introduction and Evolutionnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City IDNYC
A program that provides a free 
identification card to every city 
resident, including the most 
vulnerable populations who may 
have difficulty obtaining other gov-
ernment-issued ID, and provides 
access to services and programs 
offered by the City and other 
businesses.

New York City Community 
Schools Strategic Plan
Key system-building efforts that will 
be implemented over the next three 
years to achieve and surpass the 
City’s initial goal of establishing 100 
fully developed Community Schools 
to improve student achievement 
through strong partnerships among 
principals, parents, teachers and 
Community Based Organizations.

The CEO Poverty Measure,  
2005 - 2013

An Annual Report from  
the Office of the Mayor

Ten-Year 
Capital 
Strategy

Ten-Year Capital Strategy
This strategy provides a blueprint 
for capital spending over the next 
decade. OneNYC and the Ten-Year 
Capital Strategy are aligned to 
ensure funding for OneNYC goals.

April 2015

The CEO Poverty 
Measure Report 
This year’s annual report by the 
Center for Economic Opportunity 
in the Office of the Mayor that 
measures poverty in New York 
City and is aligned with OneNYC’s 
focus on anti-poverty goals.  The 
CEO measure improves on the 
official methodology by consider-
ing the cost of living in New York 
City and the resources available 
to households after tax and social 
policy is taken into account. 

INITIATIVES LAUNCHED IN 2015

New York City and the  
100 Resilient Cities Initiative
100 Resilient Cities (100RC) is an innovative global 
network pioneered by the Rockefeller Foundation to help 
cities around the world become more resilient to the phys-
ical, social, and economic challenges that are a growing 
part of the 21st century. New York City was in the first 
wave to join the network in 2013, and through its partic-
ipation, demonstrates leadership in resiliency and takes 
advantage of the resources and opportunities it presents.

100RC supports the adoption and incorporation of a 
view of resilience that includes not just the shocks—
superstorms, blackouts, heat waves, and other acute 
events—but also the stresses that weaken the fabric of a 
city on a day-to-day or cyclical basis. Examples of these 
stresses include high unemployment; aging infrastruc-
ture; an overtaxed or inefficient public transportation 
system; endemic violence; and growing inequality. By 
addressing both the shocks and the stresses in a holistic 
manner, a city becomes more able to respond to adverse 
events, and is better able to deliver basic functions in 
both good times and bad, to all populations.

New York City has a history of innovating in the face 
of change. This plan adopts the approach of the 100RC 
initiative, recognizing the need to address acute shocks 
and chronic stresses in securing the city’s growth. 
Equity, sustainability, and resiliency are incorporated 
into OneNYC, including through the involvement of 
agencies across City government and extensive public 
engagement in creating the plan.

The City will continue to work with 100RC and its 
partners, to develop and test new systems, tools and 
methodologies for measuring and improving resiliency.

Learn more about 100RC at 100resilientcities.org.

13

Introduction and Evolutionnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Four principles informed 
OneNYC goals and initiatives:

Growth

Population growth, real estate 
development, job creation, and the 
strength of industry sectors

Equity

Fairness and equal access to assets, 
services, resources, and opportunities 
so that all New Yorkers can reach their 
full potential

Sustainability

Improving the lives of our residents and 
future generations by cutting 
greenhouse gas emissions, reducing 
waste, protecting air and water quality 
and conditions, cleaning brownfields, 
and enhancing public open spaces

Resiliency

The capacity of the city to withstand 
disruptive events, whether physical, 
economic, or social

OneNYC: New Approaches
Previous PlaNYC reports have focused on the pressing issues of growth, 
sustainability, and resiliency. All of these goals remain at the core of OneNYC, 
but there are three significant differences in the approach taken with this plan.

A Focus on Inequality
With the poverty rate remaining high and income inequality continuing to grow, 
equity has come to the forefront as a guiding principle. In this plan, we envision 
a city that is growing, sustainable, resilient, and equitable—a place where 
everyone has a fair shot at success. The explicit addition of equity is critical, 
because a widening opportunity gap threatens the city’s future. These four 
pillars together will spur the innovation we will need for the next century. We 
know that a drive for a sustainable environment leads to innovations that create 
whole new businesses, while driving out poverty leads to healthier people, and 
safe neighborhoods spur businesses to grow. They all grow together.

A Regional Perspective
To make the changes we need, OneNYC recognizes that we need to reach out 
to our neighbors so that our whole region may thrive. The strength of the city 
is essential for the strength of the region, and strong communities around the 
city make it more competitive nationally and globally. 

Leading the Change We Need 
While New York City has a vast and complex government, even one of its 
scale cannot accomplish all that needs to be done on its own. While City 
government will take the lead in every single aspect of OneNYC, this plan also 
calls for action from other levels of the public and even private sector. That 
means calling for some actions that are not entirely within the control of the 
City government, but they are all steps that are credible and necessary. We 
will not stop pushing for the right thing for our people because some of it is 
out of our control.

OneNYC is a citywide effort. Nearly all City agencies came together in 
cross-cutting working groups that examined underlying trends and data in 
order to develop new initiatives. The working groups were tasked with 
envisioning how the physical city should be shaped to address a range of 
social, economic, and environmental challenges on the municipal and 
regional scale. This exercise required deeper consideration of the 
relationship between physical and human capital, and acknowledgment that 
the built environment has manifest implications for not just economic 
growth and development, but public health and the delivery of essential 
services. This process helped break down agency “silos” and resulted in an 
ambitious set of visions, realized through supporting goals and initiatives, 
which crossed the traditional boundaries of City agencies and their focus 
areas of activity.

14

Introduction and Evolutionnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Vision 1  
New York City will continue to be the world’s most dynamic urban economy, 
where families, businesses, and neighborhoods thrive

Industry 

Expansion & 
Cultivation

Workforce 
Development

Housing

Thriving 

Neighborhoods

Culture

Transportation

Infrastructure  

Planning

Broadband

Vision 2 
New York City will have an inclusive, equitable economy that offers well-paying 
jobs and opportunity for all New Yorkers to live with dignity and security

Early  

Childhood

Integrated 

Government &  
Social Services

Healthy 

Neighborhoods, 

Active Living

Healthcare  

Access

Criminal Justice 

Reform

Vision 
Zero

Vision 3  
New York City will be the most sustainable big city in the world and a global 
leader in the fight against climate change

80 x 50

Zero Waste

Air Quality

Brownfields

Water 

Management

Parks & Natural 

Resources

Vision 4 
Our neighborhoods, economy, and public services will be ready to withstand and 
emerge stronger from the impacts of climate change and other 21st century threats

Neighborhoods

Buildings

Infrastructure

Coastal 
Defense

15

Introduction and Evolutionnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Neighborhood Spotlight 
Bronx River Corridor
We’re taking the neighborhoods along the Bronx 
River Corridor —including the West Farms, Crotona 
Park East, Longwood, Soundview, and Hunts Point 
neighborhoods—to illustrate how OneNYC will guide 
future growth, sustainability, and resiliency.

These Bronx neighborhoods —vibrant, diverse, and 
ever-changing like the city as a whole—represent the 
opportunities and challenges that drive this plan in a 
number of ways.

Each vision includes a “Neighborhood Spotlight” 
section that shows how this plan will impact the 
Bronx River Corridor. 

“We need to think about how 
we’re addressing high asthma 
rates in this area. We are seeing 
lots of new residential develop-
ment in the neighborhood. When 
these new units come in, they 
often include parks and trees. 
This transition is helping to im-
prove this neighborhood.” 

—Donston E. 
Walsingham Construction

“Our community has long been 
known as the ‘Toxic Triangle’ 
between the Sheridan, Bruckner 
and Cross Bronx Expressways. 
We see a direct correlation be-
tween health issues and access 
to open space and we’re trying 
to bring recreation opportuni-
ties to the area.”

—Dave S. 
Youth Ministries for  
Peace and Justice

“I’ve lived in the Bronx since 
1979 and worked at Hunts 
Point Market since 1988. Since 
then, the community has 
changed dramatically. Every-
one feels safer. I think things 
are improving.”

—Rene C. 
Employee at Mosner Family Brands,  
Hunts Point Cooperative Market

5 2

EAST RIVER

SOUNDVIEWPARKCROTONAPARKBRONXPARKSHERIDAN EXPYCROSS-BRONX EXPYBRUCKNER EXPYBRONX RIVER PKWYSOUTHERN BLVD180TH STTREMONT AVECROTONA PARK EASTHUNTSPOINTSOUNDVIEWLONGWOODPARKCHESTERBRONXRIVERHOUSESWESTFARMSPublic Transit Usage and  
Commute Times, 2012

While most Corridor residents (66%) use 
public transit to commute to work, 57% 
of them had a commute of 40 minutes or 
longer to work. 

Percent of Households Below 
Poverty Level, 2012

Unemployment and a high poverty 
rate of 37% of households 
demonstrate the challenges residents 
have finding well-paying jobs. 

6

BRONX RIVER

66%

57%

58%

54%

56%

46%

37%

29%

19%

Bronx River 

Corridor

ACS 2012

The Bronx

New York 

City

Bronx River 

Corridor

ACS 2012

The Bronx

New York 

City

Percentage of Residents Who  
Eat 5 or More Servings of Fruit/ 
Vegetables Daily, 2013

Asthma Emergency Department Visits 
(Youths and Adults) by Neighborhoods, 
2013

This area lacks access to fresh and healthy 
food, with bodegas accounting for 77% 
of all retail food stores; only 4% of food 
establishments specialize in fresh produce.

Residents experience the health effects of urban 
environmental conditions. Asthma hospitaliza-
tion and ED visit rates are higher in the Bronx 
when compared to the citywide average rate. 

Quartiles

4%-7%

8%-10%

11%-13%

14%-21%

no population

Quartiles

4%-7%

8%-10%

11%-13%

14%-21%

no population

DOHMH, Community Health Survey 2013

DOHMH, Community Health Survey 2013

SOUNDVIEWPARKCROTONAPARKBRONXPARKSHERIDAN EXPYCROSS-BRONX EXPYBRUCKNER EXPYBRONX RIVER PKWYSOUTHERN BLVD180TH STTREMONT AVECROTONA PARK EASTHUNTSPOINTSOUNDVIEWLONGWOODPARKCHESTERBRONXRIVERHOUSESWESTFARMSHow New Yorkers Shaped OneNYC

To find out New Yorkers’ priorities and to tap their most creative ideas, we used a 
variety of methods—from roundtable discussions to an online survey—during the 
months leading up to the launch of OneNYC. Our residents, and the communities 
they comprise, represent tremendous diversity of knowledge, culture, interests, 
skills, and economic resources. Approximately 3 million New Yorkers—37 percent of 
the City’s total population—were born outside the U.S., and 49 percent of all 
residents speak a language other than English at home. Some residents are intensely 
involved in their local community, while others are loosely attached to their 
neighborhood but still dependent on critical services.

Resident Outreach
We met face-to-face with over 1,300 New York City residents, advocacy groups and 
elected officials in one-on-one meetings, roundtable discussions, and town hall-style 
forums. We talked about issues regarding senior citizens, schools, housing, the 
environment, parks, and transportation.

Business Roundtable
Many of the city’s largest and most innovative employers met with us to tell us what 
they needed to succeed, to retain workers, to hire new ones, and to grow. We heard 
from them about their real estate needs, transportation for their workforce, broadband 
infrastructure, childcare services, as well as the importance of our cultural community.

NYCHA residents attend a 
Town Hall meeting at Johnson 
Community Center, East Harlem.

More than 7,500 New Yorkers took the online public survey

800 New Yorkers participated in the telephone survey
1,300+ residents attended more than 40 community 

meetings in every borough

177 civic organizations and over 50 elected officials’  

offices met about OneNYC

15 leaders from neighboring cities and counties met at City Hall 

to discuss the plan

Led by the Office of Sustainability, over 125 representatives  

from over 70 City agencies developed OneNYC

18

Introduction and Evolutionnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Clergy/Faith Leaders listening 
session, April 20, 2015.

Advisory Board
The Mayor’s Sustainability Advisory Board also helped to guide our thinking. The 
38-person Board represented all five boroughs and is comprised of civic leaders, policy 
specialists, and community leaders, representing sectors including sustainability, 
social services, the business community, academia, real estate, and healthcare.

Regional Coordination
Fifteen leaders, including Mayors and County Executives, from cities and counties 
in New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut met with the City to discuss the 
common challenges affecting the region, such as infrastructure, housing, jobs, and 
climate change.

Online Survey: nyc.gov/ideas
On March 6, 2015, OneNYC launched an online survey – nyc.gov/ideas – to ask New 
Yorkers for their ideas. Through the survey, over 7,500 people provided thoughtful 
and candid insights in seven languages. Respondents overwhelmingly mentioned the 
high cost of living and affordable housing as primary concerns. Comments and 
suggestions from the survey informed the plan.

Telephone Survey
We surveyed 800 New Yorkers to identify key issues and concerns. New Yorkers 
identified education, jobs, and housing as the most important issues facing the city 
today, and recognized diversity as the city’s top asset.

Most Important Issues According to New Yorkers

3% 
Environment

3% 
Connecting 
Government

7% 
Physical 
Infrastructure

7% 
Health

13% 
Public Safety

15% 
Jobs

In a telephone survey of 800 people, New Yorkers identified education, housing and 
jobs as the most important issues that the City government should be addressing.

3% 
Don’t Know

29% 
Education

20% 
Housing

19

Introduction and Evolutionnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City What We Heard from New Yorkers

Extensive pre-launch discussions with New Yorkers 
directly shaped the goals and initiatives detailed in 
this plan.

When nearly 3,500 people submitted comments to the 
online survey about housing and affordability, we 
affirmed the affordable housing commitments in 
Housing New York, the City’s ten-year housing plan. 
That plan lays out strategies to create and preserve 
200,000 affordable housing units over the next ten 
years. OneNYC now sets a goal of creating 240,000 new 
housing units—both market rate and affordable—within 
the next decade. It also calls on governments across our 
region to support efforts to create new housing 
throughout the metro area.

Other feedback focused on providing New Yorkers with 
transit access from their homes to good jobs. Through 
transit investments, job creation in diverse locations, and 
transit-accessible housing construction, this plan will 

ensure that by 2040, the average New Yorker will be able 
to reach 1.8 million jobs by transit within 45 minutes. 
Survey respondents requested that we reduce garbage in 
New York because it’s good for the environment and our 
neighborhoods. We’ve responded with a strategy to 
achieve Zero Waste by 2030. 

As this goes to press, we are still evaluating great new 
ideas. How can we increase children’s access to 
affordable afterschool and summer camp programs, 
as recommended by Ivette S. in Queens, and many 
others? Could Eman R.’s (Brooklyn) proposed annual 
“NYC Challenge” to engage New Yorkers to resolve 
local issues be incorporated into the City’s BigApps 
Competition? Can Debbie L.C.’s (Manhattan) suggestion 
for a design, technology, and media innovation 
commission help fuel growth within those industries?

We look forward to continuing to test these and other 
ideas with New Yorkers beyond OneNYC’s publication.

New York City’s Greatest Assets, According to New Yorkers

In a telephone survey of 800 people, New Yorkers identified diversity as the City’s greatest asset.

20

Introduction and Evolutionnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Model Resident-Centered Government

Through new tools for ongoing civic engagement, New York City will become a 
model for resident-centered government. As our efforts to bring Pre-K for All to tens 
of thousands of New York City families demonstrated, connecting residents to vital 
services and opportunities can be done in a more proactive, engaging manner. In the 
coming months, we will continue the conversation with residents, civic leaders, and 
elected officials as we refine initiatives.  

To achieve this goal, we will implement outreach initiatives as described in this 
report. This includes further developing the City’s Public Engagement team, 
charged with implementing engagement initiatives similar to the Pre-K for All 
outreach effort.  We will adapt best practices from successful efforts by focusing on 
quantifiable goals, conducting public opinion research to determine how best to 
engage residents proactively, and relying on data to monitor our progress in serving 
New Yorkers. We will improve existing digital tools, such as 311 and LinkNYC, to 
enhance the exchange of feedback and ideas between government and communities.

New Yorkers’ Ideas for Our City’s Future

“I would like to live within 
commuting distance from 
my CUNY job (academic 
advisor $47k plus $16k 
from my husband’s Social 
Security) without having 
to rely on a food bank. 
We’re a family of three 
living in East Harlem. We 
make too much for some 
lotteries and not enough 
for others. I have two 
Master’s degrees, my 
husband is 71 year old Viet 
Nam [a] vet and our 25 
year old daughter had 
been sick from mold 
exposure and cannot help.” 

—Elizabeth W., Manhattan

在都市日常中， 
創造意外的驚喜。 
如公共藝術在城市中。

“Create unexpected 
surprises in the urban 
daily life, such as public 
art in the city.” 

—Chuan-Wei T., Queens

“Works towards it 
becoming a beacon of 
sustainability, a model 
city to visit and respect 
for its Zero Waste, energy 
efficiency, and 
environmental justice 
achievements.”

“Que los jovenes que 
trabajamos podamos 
encontrar la opcion de 
alquilar un apartamento o 
estudio a bajo costo y asi 
comenzar a tener nuestra 
vida fuera de nuestra 
familia y ver la vida con 
nuevos proyectos y seguir 
adelante en nuestras vidas. 
(En lo personal tengo 28 
años y vivo con mi familia y 
no puedo rentar un estudio 
y ser independiente por 
que soy inmigrante y no 
encuentro apartamentos a 
bajo costo quisiera ya hacer 
vida independiente).”

“That we, as young people 
who work, can find 
options to rent an 
apartment or studio at  
a low cost and thus begin 
to have our lives outside 
of our family and envision 
a life with new projects 
and move forward in our 
lives. (Personally, I am 28 
years old and live at home. 
I can’t rent a studio and 
be independent because 
I’m an immigrant and 
can’t find low-cost 
apartments. I would like 
to make an independent 
life already).”

—Johny T., Bronx

Through the OneNYC online survey, over 7,500 New Yorkers shared ideas to shape our city’s future.

—Kristal I., Brooklyn 

 

21

Introduction and Evolutionnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City New York City: 
Today and 
Tomorrow

Challenges and opportunities  
facing New York City as it enters its  
fifth century 

22

Introduction and Evolutionnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Overview

New York City has been a hub of commerce and culture since 1625. Blessed with 
deep harbors and rivers running through verdant countryside, later connected by 
the Erie Canal to important trade routes, New York City grew into a domestic 
and international center of trade and commerce. Immigrants came and 
prospered, building new neighborhoods and a better life, far from the poverty 
and persecution they had fled. Industries were founded and flourished, and over 
time transformed, evolved, or departed. But thanks to the resourcefulness and 
ingenuity of New Yorkers, the city remains the global center of finance, research, 
industry, tourism, and culture. As New York City enters its next century a decade 
from now, we will leverage the great resources already available and set a path to 
prosperity for all. 

TD Five Boro Bike Tour

23

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City What Works

Among the hallmarks of New York City are tolerance, pluralism, openness, caring for 
others, innovation, and business acumen. We are truly international: our residents 
come from every country, and over 180 languages are spoken by students in our 
public schools. We celebrate our diversity. We have shown the ability to recover 
from both man-made and natural disasters, including the attacks of 9/11 and the 
2008 recession, and will continue to recover from Hurricane Sandy. 

With jobs at an all-time high, our entrepreneurial spirit can be seen from Wall Street 
to storefront businesses and revitalized neighborhoods across the city. New York City 
is now the safest big city in the country. Our air and water are cleaner than they have 
been in recent memory. We welcomed a record 56.4 million tourists in 2014, and we 
continue to attract thousands of new people each year who want to call New York City 
home. We are reclaiming the waterfront, remediating brownfields, developing 
affordable housing and new commercial districts, providing all four-year-olds access 
to full-day pre-kindergarten, and creating open spaces for all to enjoy. 

New York City’s cultural attractions offer something for everyone, with hundreds of 
museums, art galleries, performing arts companies, concert halls, Broadway 
theaters, zoos, and botanical gardens. Of the 60 largest U.S. cities, the Trust for 
Public Land ranks New York City second overall in park acreage, access, and 
investment in open spaces. And with more than 100 degree-granting educational 
institutions and over 600,000 students, the city is home to as many students as 
Boston’s total population.

24

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City What Could Be Better

New York City’s success has brought many benefits, but the city also faces significant 
challenges. Because so many people want to live here and many are doing well 
financially, affordable housing is scarce. A growing population—expected to reach 9 
million by 2040—will test our infrastructure systems. Mass transit, roads, and other 
infrastructure are heavily used, but they have not been fully maintained over the 
years. For some New Yorkers, public transit is not easily accessible, or the system 
can’t get them across their own borough because it was designed to take people into 
Manhattan, and commute times are too long from many areas.

As commercial rents go up and neighborhoods change, existing small businesses and 
shops, many of which are family-owned and have been in business for a long time, 
struggle to stay open. Our public schools need to improve. Slow Internet speeds and 
gaps in accessibility hamper competitiveness and the ability of New Yorkers to be a 
part of all that New York has to offer. Income inequality is rising and nearly half of 
the city’s population now lives at or near the poverty threshold, while 1.4 million 
residents live in households that lack sufficient food. Too many artists and talented 
mid-level professionals leave for other cities that are more affordable. Homelessness 
is too high, and over half of renters spend more than 30 percent of their income on 
housing. Asthma, obesity, and diabetes rates remain high, especially among residents 
in low-income neighborhoods. And we could be better prepared for climate change 
and other 21st century threats.

25

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Addressing Core Challenges and Opportunities

It is time to build on our strengths and address these challenges and opportunities. 
We are all at risk when so many New Yorkers struggle to find living-wage jobs, good 
schools for their children, affordable housing, and neighborhoods and communities 
they can proudly call their home for years to come. We run the risk of becoming two 
New Yorks: one for the affluent and one for those who are left out of the city’s 
success and lack access to good schools or good wages for hard work. What we do 
now to confront these challenges will define the future of New York City and what 
kind of city we leave to our children. 

Core Challenges  
and Opportunities

PlaNYC 2007 & 2011

OneNYC 2015

Growing 
Population

Infrastructure 

Needs

Growing 
Inequality

Importance of 

the Region

Evolving 
Economy

Urban 

Environmental 
Conditions & 
Climate Change

New York City 

Voices

New Vision for OneNYC

OneNYC builds upon the four 
core challenges addressed in past 
PlaNYC reports, and now includes 
growing inequality, the importance 
of the region, and New York City  
voices.

26

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City A Growing Population 

New York City continues to grow at a rapid rate, in large part through immigration. 
With nearly 8.4 million people, the city’s population is at an all-time high, and is 
expected to reach 9 million by 2040. Growth is projected to be greatest outside 
Manhattan—with the largest increases in Brooklyn and the Bronx. This increased 
population will strain the city’s infrastructure and test the reliability of services. 
New York City’s population is also aging: by 2040, the number of New Yorkers over 
65 will surpass school-age children. These changes will create new challenges in 
everything from the delivery of services to urban design. We must improve social 
and physical infrastructure to provide equitable access to services and employment 
for a changing population.

Throughout its history, people have flocked to New York City, drawn by its economic 
opportunities and ethnic networks. Foreign-born residents comprise almost 40 
percent of the total population. At the same time, many young, educated Americans 
are also moving to New York City. 

With a growing population comes the critical need for additional affordable housing 
for all New Yorkers. In order to accommodate projected growth and the natural loss 
of some housing over time, and to reduce pressure on housing prices, the City 
intends to create 240,000 new housing units—including market rate and 
affordable—in the next decade. 

New York City population, 1900–2040 (projected)

7.9 in
1950

8.4 in
2015

9 in
2040

% Growth

2010–2040

7%  

Staten Island

8%  

Queens

7%  

Manhattan

13%  

Brooklyn

14%  

Bronx

10,000,000

9,000,000

8,000,000

7,000,000

6,000,000

5,000,000

4,000,000

3,000,000

2,000,000

1,000,000

S
N
O

I

L

L

I

M

3.4 in
1900

NYC Department of City Planning

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

27

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City An Evolving Economy

The city has an all-time high of 4.2 million wage and salary jobs, adding 113,000 
private sector jobs in 2014 alone. Our economic activity, measured by Gross City 
Product (GCP), is $647 billion, and the city’s economic recovery since the last 
recession outpaced the nation’s, with an 11.5 percent increase in jobs between 2009 
and 2014, compared to only 6.1 percent nationally. 

Sustainable economic growth and stability depend on the continued strength of 
our core sectors, as well as economic diversification across both boroughs and 
sectors. The rate of job growth in the boroughs has been higher recently, 
outpacing Manhattan in the past ten years. While employment is becoming 
geographically diversified, it continues to remain highly concentrated in 
Manhattan. 

The traditional core sectors of the city’s economy—finance, insurance, and real 
estate—remain the foundation of our economic strength. While they represent 11.7 
percent of our jobs, they comprise 38.4 percent of GCP. They also provide a 
substantial tax base that supports investment in infrastructure and services to 

ensure our long-term ability to accommodate continued growth. 

Employment growth 
2009-2014:  
New York City vs. 
United States

3.5%

3.0%

2.5%

2.0%

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

0.5%

3.0%

2.6%

1.7%

2.0%

1.9%

2.0%

1.6%

1.0%

0.9%

-0.2%

2009– 
2010

2010– 
2011

2011– 
2012

2012– 
2013

2013– 
2014

New York City

United States

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics

The city’s economic recovery  
since the last recession outpaced 
the nation’s. 

Jobs in sectors such as retail, food services, and home care are 
increasing due to growth in the overall population, tourism, and 
senior residents. These sectors provide opportunities for people 
who lack the skills to compete for high-wage jobs, and provide 
access to the job ladder to advance their careers. New York City has 
many people in this position, and these jobs are vital. One of the 
reasons less-skilled people stay in New York City, despite the high 
cost of living, is that jobs of this kind are available and generally 
accessible without a car. Expanding skills training and workforce 
development programs, as well as access to higher education, will 
enable low-skilled entry level workers to gain the skills needed to 
move into higher paying jobs.

While New York City is home to 52 Fortune 500 companies, small 
businesses with fewer than 100 employees are a critical part of the 
city’s economy. These businesses account for more than half of New 
York’s private sector employment. Small business owners in New York 
often face regulatory hurdles to starting and growing their businesses, 
while the high cost of living makes it difficult to attract and retain  
 
                               talented young people.

28

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Employment change in total jobs 2001–2011

More than 50% Gain in Jobs

Up to 50% Gain in Jobs

Norwood
72% Job Gain

Belmont
169% Job Gain

East Village
82% Job Gain
Chinatown
61% Job Gain

Brooklyn Heights
85% Job Gain

Park Slope
61% Job Gain

Borough Park
80% Job Gain

Homecrest
54% Job Gain

Brighton Beach
102% Job Gain

New Brighton - Silver Lake
52% Job Gain

Brooklyn Navy Yard
119% Job Gain
Downtown Brooklyn
88% Job Gain

Rugby - Remsen Village
229% Job Gain

Flatbush
52% Job Gain

Ocean Parkway South
71% Job Gain

Van Nest - Morris Park
Westchester Square
59% Job Gain

Crotona Park East
60% Job Gain

Queensboro Hill
59% Job Gain

Glen Oaks - Floral Park
New Hyde Park
103% Job Gain

JFK International Airport
100% Job Gain

U.S. Census Bureau, LEHD Origin-Destination Employment Statistics, v. 7
Geography: Neighborhood Tabulation Area (NTA)

29

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Growing Inequality

Despite its overall prosperity, New York City continues to struggle with high rates 
of poverty and growing income inequality. The crumbling of the middle class is 
not just a local problem, it is one that requires a national solution, and is a crisis of 
our time. Over the past decade, income inequality has increased in the city, 
surpassing the national average—and in recent years, it has continued to rise. 

During the 2008 recession, workers experienced flat or declining wages, except 
for those in select high-wage sectors. The city has experienced an impressive 
recovery, gaining 422,000 private jobs between 2009 and 2014. While job growth 
has occurred across a range of sectors, it has been particularly strong in lower-
paying sectors, such as accommodation, food service and retail trade. Since 2014, 
more workers have started to see wage gains due to declining unemployment and 
increasing demand for labor. Nonetheless, these gains have not fully offset the 
wage stagnation that occurred during the recession. As a result, low-income New 
Yorkers continue to struggle with the city’s high costs of living. Without training 
to support career development, these individuals and their families are likely to 
remain in poverty. Recognizing that high-, mid-, and low-skill jobs are all part of 
a diverse, healthy economy, the City is committed to supporting job quality 
across all sectors—higher wages for low-wage jobs and expanded opportunities 
for skills training. 

These employment and wage trends are occurring against a backdrop of other 
significant economic challenges. Nearly half of the city’s population still lives in or 
near poverty, including a disproportionate number of African-American, Latino, and 
Asian New Yorkers. The city’s already-high cost of living is still increasing. The 
supply of housing has not kept pace with the increase in population, leading to a 
severe lack of affordable housing, especially for those who are least well off. 
Homelessness is at a record high. 

As it continues to grow, the City must invest strategically to create new economic 
opportunities for the most vulnerable and lowest-income New Yorkers. We must 
provide increased support to the economic sectors that drive middle-income job 
growth. The city’s rapid employment growth offers a real opportunity to improve 
the incomes of low-wage workers. To ensure that this happens, we must do all we 
can to continue to raise the minimum wage. We must also work with employers and 
labor unions to improve employee training, provide a path for advancement, and 
emphasize employee retention.

30

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Percentage of population below poverty threshold, 2009–2013
21.5 percent of New Yorkers are below the poverty level, and 45.1 percent are at or near the poverty level.

More than 30% in Poverty

25-30% in Poverty

20-25% in Poverty

15-20% in Poverty

10-15% in Poverty

Less than 10% in Poverty

Morrisania - East Tremont

University Heights - Fordham

Highbridge - South Concourse

16.4%

20.7%

29.5%

18.8%

34.1%

32.5%

32%

20.5%

16.8%

23.5%

22.4%

29.2%

25.2%

21.9%

9.7%

7.3%

20.4%

11.3%

10.3%

21.4%

9.3%

20.7%

22.5%

25.5%

23.2%

14.5%

27.9%

14.1%

21.1%

19.6%

27.8%

33.6%

18.4%

32.1%

19.6%

22.6%

12.5%

13.4%

9.3%

29.5%

27.4%

24.9%

25%

21.7%

20.7%

14.6%

32.1%

25.6%

20.4%

13.8%

22%

20.2%

24%

10.1%

Center for Economic Opportunity, Office of the Mayor
U.S. Census Bureau, ACS 2009-2013 5-Year Estimates, Public Use Microdata Sample Files as 
Augmented by CEO Geography: Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA)

21.7%

East New York - Starrett City

Brownsville - Ocean Hill

Borough Park

31

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Infrastructure Needs

While New York City is a 21st century global city, its aging infrastructure is straining 
to meet the demands of a modern and dynamic urban center. Infrastructure 
connects people, neighborhoods, and businesses, and provides essential services—
the water we drink, the gas we need to cook, the electricity that lights homes and 
businesses, and the Internet access to communicate and learn. 

Despite a mountain of evidence emphasizing the link between modern 
infrastructure and economic growth, public investment across the region has not 
kept pace with capital investment needs. New York City’s transit system is in need 
of improvement and expansion to provide the best possible service to New Yorkers. 
Our subway system, the nation’s largest, had a record 1.7 billion total riders total in 
2013 and is near or at full capacity. Every day, New Yorkers crowd onto subways and 
buses, with an average commute time of 47 minutes—the highest of any major 
American city. Investing directly in transit systems, including expanded Select Bus 
Service routes and a citywide ferry system, as well as coordination with regional 
entities, is key to supporting continued growth and will support competitiveness. 
Significant expansion of our existing rail transit system is extremely expensive and 
federal resources are dwindling. Yet without investments to maintain a state of 
good repair, aging infrastructure incurs higher costs down the road and imperils 
our long-term prosperity.

Many of the city’s gas, steam, sewer, and water lines are not only aging, but are made 
of materials not in use today, and prone to leaks and breaks. Much of the city’s 
underground infrastructure is not mapped, making it hard to pinpoint issues to 
make efficient repairs or improvements. Our highways and bridges are also old and 
at risk. The Brooklyn Bridge, for instance, opened in 1883. 

The Internet is rapidly becoming as central to our daily lives as electricity, gas, and 
water. However, currently 22 percent of New York City households lack broadband 
Internet at home. Affordability of Internet services is cited as the main barrier to 
broadband adoption in New York City. Increased affordability and public availability 
of broadband service will help to close the adoption gap and increase access to 
online tools that support individuals, families, and businesses.

Identifying adequate funding resources to maintain and upgrade critically aging 
infrastructure and ensure a consistent state of good repair across the city is a  
major challenge.

32

Aging infrastructure strains to 
meet both manmade and natural 
challenges.

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Urban Environmental Conditions  
and Climate Change

In recent years, New York has made substantial headway in protecting the 
environment through improved air quality and reduced greenhouse gas emissions, 
which have decreased by 19 percent since 2005. We have reduced energy use in 
buildings and switched to less carbon intensive electricity generation. New York 
City’s air quality is the cleanest it has been in over fifty years, and among U.S. cities, 
it has moved from having the 7th to the 4th cleanest air over the past several years. 

More than 100 brownfields encompassing over one million square feet have been 
cleaned up and redeveloped. The 23 sites completed this year alone will generate 
more than 420 new jobs, 550 units of affordable housing, and $162 million in new tax 
revenue. Green infrastructure initiatives such as bioswales help to mitigate 
stormwater flooding and prevent the discharge of pollutants into the city’s waterways. 

At the same time, longstanding environmental conditions continue to have chronic 
impacts on the health and livelihoods of New Yorkers, with four out of every 1,000 
children aged 5-17 years hospitalized for asthma in 2012. As the city’s population 
continues to grow, additional strain will be placed on the environment from basic 
infrastructure needs, including a projected 14 percent increase in heating fuel demand 
by 2030 and a 44 percent increase in energy consumption by 2030. The city generates 
about 25,000 tons of residential, business, and institutional garbage every day, but only 
about 15.4 percent of waste collected by City workers is diverted for recycling. 

Kayaking on the Bronx River

33

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City SEA LEVEL - MEAN ANNUAL CHANGES

Baseline (2000-2004) 

75”

75

70

65

60

55

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0”

58”

22-50”

18-39”

13”

15”

30”

11-21”

8”

4-8”

10”

2”

2020s

2050s

2080s

2100

2020s 

2050s 

2080s 

2100

High
Middle
Low

Low 10th percentile  Middle 25th to 75th percentile  High 90th percentile

Building the 
Knowledge Base for 
Climate Resiliency
New York City Panel on
Climate Change 2015 Report

NPCC 2015 Report

volume

1336

Climate Change
The city also faces increasing risks from the impacts of global climate change.  While 
we have made significant strides in reducing our contributions to climate change, we 
still expect to face local impacts that could threaten the city.  In partnership with the 
New York City Panel on Climate Change (NPCC), the City has continued its work to 
understand these risks and make sure that the best available science continues to 
inform the City’s climate policy.

Earlier this year, the NPCC released Building the Knowledge Base for Climate Resiliency, 
which included updated projections for the region.  Among them, we can expect to 
 see, by the 2050s, increased average temperatures (4.1 to 5.7° F), increased average 
precipitation (4 to 11 percent), and rising sea levels (11 to 21 inches).  The average 
number of days per year above 90° F is expected to at least double. Due to sea level rise 
alone, coastal flood events will increase in both frequency and intensity.  The number of 
the most intense hurricanes across the North Atlantic Basin is also expected to increase. 

Each of these changes will increase the exposure of the city’s neighborhoods, 
businesses, and infrastructure. Health impacts on New Yorkers will continue to 
increase. Fortunately, the City continues to reduce these risks.  We are reducing our 
greenhouse gas emissions and adapting our neighborhoods, with critical 
investments now underway on our coastline, in our buildings, and for our 
infrastructure.  Much more remains to be done, and the City is committed to leading 
the globe in this fight, to the benefit of future generations. 

NPCC mid-range projections on climate change

Chronic Hazards

Average Temperature

Precipitation

Baseline (1971-2000)

54°F

50.1 in.

Baseline (2000-2004)

Sea Level Rise

0

Extreme Events

Baseline (1971-2000)

Number of days per year with maxi-
mum temperature at or above  90° F

18

Baseline (2000-2004)

2050s

Middle Range

+4.1 to 5.7 °F

+4 to 11%

2050s

Middle Range

+11 to 21 in.

2050s

Middle Range

39 to 52

2050s

Middle Range

New York Panel on Climate Change,  
2015 Report

Future annual frequency of today’s 
100-year flood  at the battery 

1%

1.6 to 2.4%

34

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City New York City Voices

New York City works best when New Yorkers are involved with their city and have a 
say in their government, and when government listens to their voices to make better 
decisions. We need to create new processes for communication and dialogue. The 
result will be more informed policymaking and better-designed programs, and New 
Yorkers with the tools and resources to help shape the future of their city. Engaged 
New Yorkers are empowered residents who interact with their government, and can 
effectively help set priorities and shape policy. 

There are a number of fundamental challenges to increasing civic engagement and 
democratic participation. More than one-third of the lowest-income New Yorkers, 
for example, lack broadband Internet access, which hinders their communications 
and access to City services. Only 18 percent of New Yorkers do volunteer work, 
below the national average of 25 percent, and 49 percent are dissatisfied with the 
level of cultural services in their neighborhood. Only 66 percent of eligible New 
York City voters are registered, and the voter turnout rate was 21 percent in the 
2014 election.

Decisions about City policies and initiatives should be informed by broad public 
engagement with a wide range of stakeholders, including residents whose voices are 
not heard because of barriers such as language and time. Recognizing the 
importance of this dialogue in shaping policy, OneNYC sought and continues to seek 
input from a broad range of residents.

Mayor Bill de Blasio, NYCHA 
Chair Shola Olatoye, and Public 
Advocate Letitia James with 
residents of the Wagner Houses in 
Manhattan

35

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Change in 
commuting trends

90,000

80,000

70,000

60,000

50,000

40,000

30,000

20,000

10,000

0

14.0%

12.0%

10.0%

8.0%

6.0%

4.0%

2.0%

0.0%

In 

Commuters

Reverse 
Commuters

growth

% growth

In Commuters grew by  

9.5%
12.5%

Reverse Commuters grew by 

U.S. Census Transportation Planning Package

Importance of the Region

New York City’s future is intertwined with its metropolitan region. The city’s economy 
drives the region’s prosperity, while benefiting from the region’s transportation, skilled 
workforce, cultural resources, and extensive infrastructure. Our suburbs and our city 
face many of the same issues, including increased income disparity, the need for 
affordable housing to keep pace with our growth, and a shared harbor. Between 1990 
and 2010, the region grew by 10.9 percent, with the greatest percentage changes in 
population in Northern New Jersey (14.3 percent). At the same time, New York City’s 
job growth constituted 80 percent of the region’s growth since 2000.

Every year, residents in the region take more than four billion trips, or 184 per person, 
on buses, subways, commuter railroads, and ferries. No other U.S. metropolitan area 
comes close. Regional travel is not only about coming into Manhattan. Between 2000 
and 2010, the number of reverse commuters increased by 12.5 percent, compared to 9.5 
percent arriving at our city’s regional transportation hubs. The ability to access a broad 
range of employment opportunities and workers within the region enhances the city’s 
competitiveness as a place to live and to locate businesses. 

However, we are not keeping pace with this growth in regional travel, and must 
coordinate with our regional partners to advocate for the critical transportation 
connections across the Hudson in New Jersey, as well as with Long Island, 
Connecticut, and beyond. The fragmenting effects of a multitude of jurisdictions 
have hindered regional planning in our broader region, including in 

Transit ridership, 1972-2012
6,000,000

S
R
E
G
N
E
S
S
A
P

 

Y
L

I

A
D

 

F
O

 

S
N
O

I

L

L

I

M

5,000,000

4,000,000

3,000,000

400,000

300,000

300,000

100,000

Regional Planning Association— 
Fragile Success

New York City 

Subway

Penn Station  

(Long Island Rail Road, 

New Jersey Transit, 

Amtrak)

Grand Central 

(Metro-North Railroad)

1972

1980

1988

1996

2004

2012

36

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Percentage of  
total jobs

 45%
NYC

Percentage of gross
regional product

transportation, energy, telecommunications, and a number of other crucial areas. 
The siloed delivery of infrastructure and services does not produce optimal 
outcomes. New York City must be a leader in working with regional 
governments. This will ensure regional cooperation and coordination and that 
funds are wisely invested. 

A powerful illustration of this shared responsibility is that over $266 billion will be 
spent in the region over the next ten years by the City as well as regional agencies, 
such as the Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) and Port Authority of 
New York and New Jersey (PANYNJ), and private utilities.  The City’s preliminary 
ten-year capital budget makes up nearly 25 percent of this anticipated spending.  
This spending has a direct impact on New York City’s capacity to thrive and meet its 
goals for equity, sustainability, and resiliency.  Looking ahead to the next ten years 
and beyond, the City is committed to taking a leadership role in directing these 
investments and incorporating them into our own strategic process, so that regional 
spending can be leveraged for the city’s maximum benefit.

 46%
NYC

Anticipated capital spending by City of New York and 
regional agencies, ten-year estimate*

Percentage of total 
geographic area

3% 
Housing
$6,957

3% 
Economic 
Development
$8,072

13% 
Education
$35,480

3% 
Telecom-
munications
$7,096

11% 
Recovery and 
Resiliency
$28,558

Despite comprising only 4 percent 
of the physical area, New York City 
is a powerful economic engine for 
the entire metropolitan region.

15% 
Energy and 
Water
$40,782

Total

$266 billion

3% 
City Services
$7,624

4% 
Airports and 
Freight
$11,273

36% 
Commuter Rail/
Transit/ 
Subway
$95,860

6% 
Bridges and 
Tunnels
$15,168

3% 
Highways
$9,203

*Since regional agencies and private utilities have varied capital budget years and timeframes, this analysis consists of a “rough 
justice” extrapolation where shorter-term capital budgets were extrapolated to a ten-year timeframe by assuming they would 
match projected annual spending in the future, escalated by inflation. For instance, the City assumes the MTA’s proposed 
2015-2019 budget of $32 billion will be funded and subsequently repeated from 2020-2024, escalating to $37 billion based on 
inflation adjustment. The analysis is intended to be illustrative of the magnitude and use of future capital expenditures based 
on reasonable assumptions. 

37

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Major Planned City and 
Regional Capital Projects, 
2014-2025

Projects located in Schoharie, Ulster 
and Westchester Counties

2nd Avenue Subway
Phase II Construction

NYU Langone Hospital
Sandy Repairs and Mitigation

Portal Rail Bridge Reconstruction

Pulaski Skyway Improvements

La Guardia Airport - Various Projects

PATH Newark Airport Extension

World Trade Center Redevelopment

Newark Liberty International
Airport - Various Projects

Bayonne Bridge Navigational Clearance

East Side Access: LIRR Access
to Grand Central Station

BQE Triple Cantilever
Reconstruction/Rehabilitation

Southeast Queens
Sewer Build-out

Citywide Green Infrastructure
Program (not shown)
DEP - $940 million

Acronyms
CSO: Combined Sewer Over(cid:31)ow
WWTP: Wastewater Treatment Plant

Note: Includes planned city and regional 
capital projects with budgets more than 
$200 million.
Labeled projects represent more than $1 
billion in budgeted cost.

Many agencies and entities are responsible for the capital spending that maintains and 
improves the infrastructure that makes New York City the thriving center of the region. City 
agencies with significant capital budgets include the Department of Transportation, the 
Department of Environmental Protection, the School Construction Authority, and the City 
University of New York, among others. Regional entities such as the Port Authority of New 
York and New Jersey, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, and New Jersey Transit 
support mass transit, roads, bridges and tunnels, and airports and freight resources; private 
utilities such as Verizon, Con Edison, and National Grid provide energy and telecommuni-
cations infrastructure; and many agencies have been involved in the recovery and resiliency 
efforts across the region since Hurricane Sandy.

This map illustrates the broad range of major planned City and regional capital projects, as reflected in the agencies’ projected 
capital plans in the next ten years.  These reported amounts may not reflect full project costs – some have begun construction 
before this time period, or may extend beyond ten years to complete.

38

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Category

Key Project Name

Lead Agency

  Airports and Freight

  Commuter Rail,  
Transit, Subway

  Bridges and Tunnels

  Roads and Highways

  Energy and Water

  Recovery and Resiliency

  Education

  Economic Development
  City Facilities

1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1
1
2
3

Bayonne Bridge Navigational Clearance
JFK Airport - Various Projects
La Guardia Airport - Various Projects
Newark Liberty International Airport - Various Projects
Gateway Program: New Hudson River Rail Tunnel Design/Construction
Gateway Program: Hudson Yards Tunnel Right-of-Way Preservation
Moynihan Station Construction Phase II
North River Tunnels Reconstruction
Pelham Bay Rail Bridge Replacement
Portal Rail Bridge Reconstruction
2nd Avenue Subway Phase II Construction
Subway Signal Upgrades - 71st Avenue-Union Turnpike Capacity Improvements
Subway Signal Upgrades - 6th Ave Line Capacity Improvements
Subway Signal Upgrades - Queens Blvd Line Capacity Improvements
Subway Signal Upgrades - Dyre Avenue Line Capacity Improvements
East Side Access to Grand Central Station
Jamaica Station - East Side Access Capacity Improvements
Jamaica Station Bus Depot Renovations
Penn Station Access and Bronx Metro North Stations
PATH Grove Street Capacity Expansion
PATH Harrison Station Replacement/Upgrade
PATH Newark Airport Extension
PATH Systemwide - Various Projects
RFK Bridge Toll Plaza and Ramps Reconstruction
Brooklyn Bridge Rehabilitation
Williamsburg Bridge Reconstruction/Rehabilitation
Kosciuszko Bridge Replacement
Goethals Bridge Modernization/Improvements
Lincoln Tunnel Helix Replacement
Pulaski Skyway Improvements
Belt Parkway Bridges Reconstruction/Rehabilitation
BQE Triple Cantilever Reconstruction/Rehabilitation
Bronx Highways and Parkways Bridges Reconstruction/Rehabilitation
FDR Drive Bridges Reconstruction/Rehabilitation
Henry Hudson Parkway Bridges Reconstruction/Rehabilitation
Van Wyck Expwy - Kew Gardens Interchange Replacement
Major Queens Highways and Parkways Bridges Reconstruction/Rehabilitation
Rainey-Corona Transmission Capacity Improvements
26th Ward WWTP - Various Projects
Bowery Bay WWTP - Various Projects
Coney Island Sewer Upgrades
Gowanus Canal CSO Facility Construction
North River WWTP Cogeneration Upgrades
Southeast Queens Sewer Build-out
Wards Island WWTP Upgrades
Mid-Island Bluebelt Stormwater Improvements
Water Siphons Replacement for Channel Deepening
Citywide Green Infrastructure Program
Delaware Aqueduct Repair
Gilboa Dam Resiliency
Kensico Eastview Connection Tunnel Resiliency
Bellevue Hospital Facility Recovery and Resiliency
Coney Island Hospital Facility Recovery and Resiliency
East Side Coastal Resiliency
Rockaway Boardwalk Reconstruction
Hudson Line Restoration
Hugh L Carey Tunnel Restoration
Queens-Midtown Tunnel Restoration
LIRR East River Tunnel & West Side Yards Resiliency Upgrades
Ocean Bay Apartments Bayside
Red Hook East Restoration
Red Hook West Restoration
Rockaway Reformulation (Jamaica Bay and Atlantic beaches)
East Shore of Staten Island
NYU Langone Resiliency Improvements
Lower Manhattan Comprehensive Coastal Protection
Bronx Community College Upgrades
Brooklyn College Expansion
City College Upgrades
College of Staten Island Expansion and Upgrade
Hostos Community College Expansion
Lehman College Expansion
Medgar Evers College Expansion
Queens College Upgrades
York College Expansion

World Trade Center Redevelopment

Bellevue Hospital Facility - Various Projects
Manhattan Districts Garage Replacement
Bronx Districts Garage Replacement

PANYNJ
PANYNJ
PANYNJ
PANYNJ
Amtrak
Amtrak
Amtrak
Amtrak
Amtrak
Amtrak
MTA
MTA
MTA
MTA
MTA
MTA
MTA
MTA
MTA
PANYNJ
PANYNJ
PANYNJ
PANYNJ
MTA
DOT
DOT
NYSDOT
PANYNJ
PANYNJ
PANYNJ
DOT
DOT
DOT
DOT
DOT
NYSDOT
DOT
ConEd
DEP
DEP
DEP
DEP
DEP
DEP
DEP
DEP   
DEP/EDC & PANYNJ
DEP
DEP
DEP
DEP
HHC
HHC
ORR, DPR
ORR, DPR
MTA
MTA
MTA
MTA
NYCHA
NYCHA
NYCHA
USACE
USACE
—
ORR, EDC
CUNY
CUNY
CUNY
CUNY
CUNY
CUNY
CUNY
CUNY
CUNY

PANYNJ

HHC
DSNY
DSNY 

39

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Total world air travel

Global Trends

61

198

697

1955

1965

1975

1990

2,992

2006

1,894

More than half of the world’s population now lives in cities, and the percentage 
continues to rise. By 2050, 66 percent of the world’s population is projected to be 
urban dwellers, dramatically reversing the global urban-rural population 
distribution of 1950. Cities must take the lead in solving the key challenges of our 
time. Growing populations and economies have the potential to open new markets 
for New York businesses, though there may also be greater competition from 
low-wage nations.

Distance passengers traveled  
(billion kilometers)
Hofstra University; International Civil  
Aviation Organization; McKinsey Global 
Institute analysis

Share of selected 
cross-border flows 
that are digital

12%

3%

3%

1
s
d
o
o
G

2
s

l
l

a
C

3
s
e
c

i

v
r
e
S

2005

2013

39%

51%

63%

1 Based on China data. 
2 Excludes other VOIP minutes. 
3 Based on US data.
Research; Telegeography; OECD; U.S. 
Bureau of Economic Analysis; McKinsey 
Global Institute analysis

Growth worldwide makes it increasingly important to address air and water quality, 
food systems, and our natural resources. Global growth is also tied to rising 
greenhouse gas emissions, climate change, and its associated sea level rise and global 
temperature changes. 

Connectivity worldwide fosters interaction and collaboration between distant 
populations on a scale never seen before. Yet a world with increased technological, 
physical, economic, and telecommunications connections also makes us more 
vulnerable to global shocks. These include the risk of terrorism (cyber or physical) 
as well as vulnerability to epidemics and economic upheavals taking place in other 
parts of the world.

While New York City has little control over these global trends, we can anticipate 
them and act now to ensure that we are better prepared and more resilient to their 
potential threats. In 2015, the world’s governments are set to establish the United 
Nations Sustainable Development Goals for 2015-2030, focusing not only on ending 
extreme poverty and hunger, but also adding the challenges of ensuring more 
equitable economic growth and environmental sustainability. OneNYC follows the 
same path, recognizing the critical link between sustainable and inclusive growth 
moving forward, not only for our city, but for the world.

World urban and rural population, 1950–2050

7,000,000

6,000,000

5,000,000

4,000,000

3,000,000

2,000,000

1,000,000

0

Rural Population

Urban Population

1950

1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

2020 2025 2030

2035 2040 2045 2050

United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs–Population Division

40

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 41

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Technology Spotlight
Digital technology and the ex-
ponential growth of data are 
transforming every aspect of 
the economy, communications, 
politics, and individual and 
family life. The implications are 
profound for every sector of 
society—including government. 
The City must respond to these 
changes and use new digital 
tools to improve services and 
create more opportunities for all 
New Yorkers.

This plan acknowledges the im-
portance of technology and data 
to each of our visions and points 
to new ways the City will engage 
with residents, develop our poli-
cies, and manage our work.

A Growing, Thriving City
The tech ecosystem is among the fastest growing and high-
est paying sectors in New York City, representing 291,000 
jobs and $30 billion in wages annually. Supporting this 
sector is a critical part of the Administration’s approach to 
tackling inequality, expanding our economy, and creating 
good jobs for all New Yorkers. The key to doing this is 
ensuring employers have the workers they need to innovate 
and grow. We will advance our competitiveness as the city 
of choice for tech firms, and we will prepare New Yorkers 
for 21st century jobs.

•  Support expanded access to affordable, reliable,  
high-speed broadband for businesses across New 
York City 

•  Enable access to flexible, affordable commercial space 
for technology companies and the broader innovation 
economy, ensuring that the city’s emerging sectors have 
the physical space to start and scale 

•  Support the creation of an advanced manufacturing  
network which would include research and develop-
ment facilities, workspace for start-ups, fabrication 
labs, workforce programs, and community engagement 
opportunities

•  Significantly continue to expand access to computer 

science/technology education across New York City public 
schools by 2020 

•  Support workforce training programs such as the Tech 

Talent Pipeline—an industry partnership designed to 
deliver quality jobs for New Yorkers and quality talent 
for New York City’s tech businesses

nyc.gov/onenyc

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 

42

42

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City A Resilient City 
Digital tools can help solve some of the City’s most urgent 
resiliency challenges, bolster neighborhood resiliency 
and social cohesion, and improve our ability to withstand 
disruptive events. 

•  Leverage digital strategies to develop a comprehensive 
and interactive platform to map and aggregate the activ-
ities of community-based organizations and government 
agencies in local communities across New York City

•  Through the Neighborhoods.nyc initiative, provide a 

baseline set of digital tools that connect residents to gov-
ernment services and each other, and leverage open-data 
for information about neighborhood-specific events

Effective Government 
The technology sector has been a leading innovator in 
service delivery. Government can apply these principles to 
improve service delivery and increase civic engagement.

•  Encourage adoption of the tech sector’s service design 

principles, such as human-centered design, to guide the 
development of City policies and service delivery practices

•  Adopt two-way digital communication, which must play 

a major role in all aspects of civic engagement, from 
government-owned online properties like nyc.gov to stra-
tegic use of non-government platforms and products 

A Just and Equitable City 
As the world becomes more digital and technology-depen-
dent, there is a growing gap between technology haves and 
have-nots. The City must narrow this digital divide and en-
sure all New Yorkers can participate fully. We will improve 
access and support innovation.

•  Continue to evolve 311’s digital capabilities, more easily 

connecting residents to services and information 

•  Ensure roll-out of LinkNYC, offering free wireless loca-

tions throughout every New York City neighborhood 

•  Invest in innovative ways to provide high-speed Inter-

net to homes, business, and the public 

•  Expand the City’s internal data integration

•  Optimize nyc.gov web content for mobile devices

•  Review every step of the City’s procurement process for 
opportunities to reduce delivery time, reduce costs, and 
make it easier for small businesses to help solve complex 
urban policy challenges

A Sustainable City
Technology can help people and institutions operate more ef-
ficiently and reduce energy needs and emissions. It will help 
us stake our claim as both the most sustainable big city in the 
world and a leader in the global fight against climate change.

•  Launch a series of mobile applications that will empower 
and engage residents to support brownfield cleanup efforts 

•  Install modern lighting and sensors, which will cut down 

lighting in empty buildings at night. This will help our 
city make a serious dent in our greenhouse gas emissions

nyc.gov/onenyc

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 

4343

New York City Today and Tomorrownyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Vision 1

Our Growing, 
Thriving City

New York City will continue to be the world’s 
most dynamic urban economy, where families, 
businesses, and neighborhoods thrive

New York City will… 

  Be home to 9 million people by 2040

  Increase median household income

  Continue to outperform the national economy

  Spur more than 4.9 million jobs by 2040

  Ensure the average New Yorker can reach 1.8 million jobs by transit 

within 45 minutes by 2040, a 25 percent increase from today

  Ensure 90 percent of New Yorkers can reach at least 200,000 jobs by 

transit within 45 minutes by 2040

  Create and preserve 200,000 affordable housing units and support 

creation of 160,000 additional new housing units by 2024 

  Support creation of at least 250,000 to 300,000 additional housing 

units by 2040

Goals

Industry Expansion & Cultivation
New York City will have the space and assets to be a global economic leader and 
grow quality jobs across a diverse range of sectors

Workforce Development
New York City will have a workforce equipped with the skills needed to participate 
in the 21st century economy 

Housing
New Yorkers will have access to affordable, high-quality housing coupled with 
robust infrastructure and neighborhood services

Thriving Neighborhoods
New York City’s neighborhoods will continue to thrive and be well-served

Culture
All New Yorkers will have easy access to cultural resources and activities

Transportation
New York City’s transportation network will be reliable, safe, sustainable, and accessible, 
meeting the needs of all New Yorkers and supporting the city’s growing economy

Infrastructure Planning & Management
New York City’s infrastructure and built environment will exemplify global 
economic, environmental, and social leadership

Broadband
Every resident and business will have access to affordable, reliable, high-speed 
broadband service everywhere by 2025

Introduction
Today, New York City is a global leader with an increasing number of jobs and 
growing economic activity that supports families, businesses, and 
neighborhoods. As detailed in New York City Today and Tomorrow, our population 
and economy are growing, with 8.4 million residents who speak an estimated 200 
languages, and a record 4.2 million salary and wage jobs. Within the past year, we 
have had the highest twelve months of job growth in over two decades. We see 
evidence of our economic strength in the expansion of firms new to New York, such 
as Google, Makerbot, and Etsy, and we remain home to more Fortune 500 companies 
than any other city in the world. Visitors continue to flock to New York City and 
support a vibrant economy, with a record 56 million tourists in 2014. 

Our economy also faces challenges. Growing income inequality, obstacles to 
job mobility, a crisis of housing affordability, and aging infrastructure could all 
hamper long-term growth. More than half of New Yorkers are rent-burdened, 
which means that they spend more than 30 percent of their income on rent. And 21.5 
percent live below the poverty line—as defined by the New York City Center for 
Economic Opportunity. In today’s evolving economy, we must compete with global 
and local peers to attract and retain talent by providing diverse opportunities for 
employment; training for individuals to prepare them to enter the workforce; 
enhancing our rich cultural life and recreation opportunities; and investing in 
infrastructure systems that support the city across all boroughs. 

OneNYC is a plan to address these challenges head-on and foster long-term, 
inclusive, and sustainable economic growth that benefits all New Yorkers. Our 
city’s economic success requires that we create access to opportunity, foster innovation, 
and train, retain, and attract talent. We have already started this important work. The City 
has enacted Paid Sick Leave so more New Yorkers can care for themselves or a family 
member without incurring financial burdens; increased and significantly expanded the 
living wage to support our residents in making ends meet; released Career Pathways, a 
plan to streamline and expand workforce development programs; and launched Housing 
New York, a vision to provide affordable housing to more New Yorkers.

We will build a stronger, more just New York by: 

•  Maintaining New York City as the global capital for innovation. We will support 

our core industries and nurture the innovation economy by investing in new, 
specialized space for creative firms; increasing capacity for Class A office space in 
Central Business Districts (CBDs); expanding state-of-the-art infrastructure; and 
recruiting and building a strong talent base.

•  Making it easier for businesses to start, grow, and thrive in New York. Small busi-
nesses represent 98 percent of all firms in New York City and provide a pathway 
to economic mobility for New Yorkers from all walks of life. To help these busi-
nesses thrive, we will simplify and reduce the regulatory landscape through the 
Small Business First initiative.

46

“Build more housing and 
make sure there is an 
affordable rental 
component throughout. 
Build it near [public] 
transit where possible 
and as green as [is] 
economically feasible. 
Invest, where possible, in 
additional local and 
regional [public] transit 
to create more areas 
where housing can be 
linked to jobs.”

—Mark S., Brooklyn 

Vision 1 nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City •  Unlocking our human capital potential by providing access to skills development 

and the opportunity for all New Yorkers to ensure that our businesses have the 
workforce they need–not just today, but in the future. We will build on the strate-
gies laid out in Career Pathways for refocusing the City’s workforce development 
resources. These initiatives will include establishing a “First Look” process for City 
hiring; targeting training programs to traditionally underrepresented New Yorkers; 
and ensuring young New Yorkers are prepared to participate in higher education 
and enter the workforce. 

•  Investing in infrastructure that connects our neighborhoods to jobs, and our city to 

the world. The City is committed to expanding transportation and broadband ac-
cess, and strengthening the systems that connect New Yorkers to economic oppor-
tunities. These improvements will better match the geography of our job growth 
and housing across the boroughs, providing 90 percent of New Yorkers with access 
to at least 200,000 jobs within a 45 minute commute by public transit. 

•  Positioning New York City as a leader in achieving triple bottom line results 

through investments in infrastructure and City-owned assets. We will begin to 
implement this strategy in our capital planning process, evaluating major invest-
ments on the basis of their economic, social, and environmental impacts. This 
process will not only support job growth, but also advance our agenda for a more 
sustainable, equitable, and productive economy.

Five key pillars drive the City’s economic development strategy:

Maintain New York City 
as the global capital for 
innovation.

Make it easier for businesses 
to start, grow, and thrive in 
New York City.

Unlock the full potential 
of our human capital by 
providing access to skills 
development to prepare 
our workforce for jobs 
today and in the future. 

Invest in infrastructure 
to connect our 
neighborhoods to jobs and 
our city to the world. 

Position New York City 
as a leader in achieving 
triple bottom line 
results—producing the 
highest economic, social, 
and environmental 
returns—from investment 
in infrastructure and 
City-owned assets. 

47

Vision 1   nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 30 Minute Commute

45 Minute Commute

60 Minute Commute

Commuter Rail (NJT, MNR, LIRR)
Subway (PATH, NYCT)
Planned Transit Improvements
Planned Ferry Routes (2017–18)
Potential Select Bus Service Routes

Long Island City, Queens
Today, the average resident of Long Island City can reach 2.3 million jobs 
within 45 minutes by transit. The City, working with the MTA, will propose 
transit improvements, housing, and employment centers to leverage 
transit connectivity.

Flatlands, Brooklyn
The average resident of Flatlands can only access 70,000 jobs within  
45 minutes by transit. The City, working with the MTA, will propose 
improvements to transit service to better connect residents to employment 
centers in Downtown Brooklyn, Lower Manhattan, and elsewhere.

Note: Commute time analysis based on 2015 MTA (NYCT, LIRR, MNR, SIR), Port Authority 
(PATH), NJ TRANSIT (Commuter Rail and Bus), and Westchester County (Bee-Line Bus) 
transit services.

U.S. Census Bureau, LEHD 2011, MTA, PANYNJ, NJT

Transit Access to Jobs
Mass transit is a vital part of most New Yorkers’ everyday 
lives. New Yorkers rely on public transportation more than 
residents of any other U.S. city—56 percent of our trips 
to work are via public transportation, while the next ten 
largest U.S. cities average only 11 percent. This reality fuels 
inclusive economic growth, supports healthy activity, 
and avoids many harmful environmental impacts. While 
New Yorkers have a longer average commute time than 
residents of other large cities, based on analysis from the 
NYU Rudin Center for Transportation the average New 
Yorker can reach over 1.4 million jobs, or nearly 40 percent 
of payroll jobs, using public transit in 45 minutes.

While average access to jobs by public transit is high, 
differences among neighborhoods are significant, as 
illustrated in the maps at left. As the city grows, higher 
housing prices can push low-income New Yorkers 
to neighborhoods far from job centers, which only 
worsens these differences. More than half of the city’s 
neighborhoods with lower-than-average household 
income—representing 2.3 million residents—have a 
lower-than-average number of jobs accessible by transit. 

Improving public transit access to jobs is one of the key 
approaches to growth and greater equality featured in 
this plan. The City will target a 25 percent increase 
in transit access to jobs for all New Yorkers, and 
will focus on neighborhoods where jobs access is 
particularly low by ensuring 90 percent of New 
Yorkers can access at least 200,000 jobs within 
45 minutes. Residents of neighborhoods such as Far 
Rockaway in Queens and Co-Op City in the Bronx cannot 
reach 200,000 jobs within 45 minutes. New public transit 
and growing jobs in the outer boroughs will help close 
this gap.

This plan features initiatives to improve jobs access for 
New Yorkers by:

•  Supporting growth of jobs closer to housing through 

investments in current and future job centers 
throughout the boroughs, from the Brooklyn-Queens 
Waterfront to Hunts Point 

•  Preparing New Yorkers to access more jobs in our 

economy and advance their careers through workforce 
development opportunities across the five boroughs

•  Creating and preserving housing close to jobs and 

transit through the implementation of Housing New 
York 

•  Improving transit connectivity by expanding the  

City’s Select Bus Service (SBS) network, creating a  
citywide ferry network, and supporting other  
system-wide investments

48

Vision 1 nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 7 LineExtensionEast SideAccessLong Island City NorthLong Island CityQueens5FlatlandsBrooklynPotential Utica AveSelect Bus ServicePotential Flatbush AveSelect Bus ServiceDowntown BrooklynApprox. 120,000 JobsLower ManhattanApprox. 195,000 JobsNeighborhood Spotlight

In the Bronx River Corridor, new transit, affordable housing, and local 
jobs will support thriving families, businesses, and neighborhoods. 

B

B

A

B

Metro-North Penn Station 
Access 
Four new stations along the 
Metro-North New Haven Line will 
create direct connections to Penn 
Station from this area.

New Affordable Housing 
Building on a prior phase of 
affordable housing development 
in the West Farms neighborhood, 
future plans will provide up to 
1,031 additional new units of 
affordable housing.

D

C

D

Hunts Point Food  
Distribution Center 
Investments in facilities modern-
ization and resiliency will ensure 
this major hub of economic activ-
ity and jobs remains competitive 
now and into the future.

BRONX RIVER

Sheridan Expressway  
Redevelopment 
Planning for a new boulevard, 
crossings, and off ramps would im-
prove pedestrian safety, waterfront 
access, and provide a direct high-
way connection to Hunts Point. 

C

A

EAST RIVER

SOUNDVIEWPARKCROTONAPARKBRONXPARK652SHERIDAN EXPYCROSS-BRONX EXPYBRUCKNER EXPYBRONX RIVER PKWYCROTONAPARK EASTHUNTS POINTLONGWOODPARKCHESTERBRONXRIVERHOUSESWESTFARMSINDICATORS + TARGETS

 Spur more than 4.9  
million jobs by 2040

 Increase the share of  
private sector jobs in  
innovation industries  
from 15 percent today to  
20 percent in 2040

 Increase median  
household income

 Continue to outperform the 
national economy, mea-
sured by growth in NYC 
GCP versus US GDP

Industry Expansion & Cultivation

Goal: New York City will have the space and 
assets to be a global economic leader and grow 
quality jobs across a diverse range of sectors

Overview
New York City has seen very strong economic growth over the past five years. We have  
gained 422,000 jobs and demonstrated an employment growth rate of 11.5 percent—
compared to 6.1 percent across the U.S., with 113,000 private sector jobs added in 2014 
alone. Yet, there is an opportunity to catalyze future growth through a more diversified 
economy with increased employment across a broader set of industries. 

New York City has benefited from, and will continue to grow, sectors in which it is a 
global leader, such as finance, insurance, and real estate (FIRE). Diversification will 
add to this growth and reduce economic risk for the city as a whole. For example, 
finance and insurance account for 30 percent of the city’s total payroll and 27 
percent of the base, but only 9 percent of employment. There are increasing signs 
that this diversification is already occurring. While lower-skill jobs in food services, 
retail, and accommodation have increased, so too have high-wage, high-growth 
sectors driven by the tech ecosystem, which now accounts for over 291,000 jobs and 
$30 billion in wages annually. Furthermore, advances in technology will continue to 
drive job growth in the high-skilled innovation industries.

Private jobs in innovation industries grew 15.8 percent from 2009 to 2013. Many of 
these jobs provide quality wages and have spurred growth outside the core 
Manhattan office markets. Moreover, some innovation industry firms have helped 
increase opportunities in traditional industries, such as manufacturing, which are 
leveraging new technologies to transform their businesses and create quality jobs. 
Although New York City is already a major hub for innovation industries, such as 
advertising, media, and technology, we have the opportunity to catalyze growth in 
others, such as the life sciences and advanced manufacturing sectors. To achieve this 
we must deliver a talented workforce, maintain a strong infrastructure, and ensure 
space and access for the specialized facilities these companies require. 

To grow a diversified economy that offers quality jobs to all New Yorkers, the City 
must unlock the potential for businesses—in traditional industries, the innovation 
economy, and small businesses—to grow and innovate.

50

nyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City NYC Innovation 
Economy 
Employment Growth

20%

14% 15%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%

2009

2013

2040

Source: Moody’s

Initiative 1

Maintain New York as the global capital for innovation 
by supporting high-growth and high-value industries

A growing population, coupled with changes in the way we live and work, requires 
both the expansion of commercial space as well as the development of new models for 
the commercial business districts (CBDs) of the future. Today’s high-growth 
industries are knowledge economy industries that invest heavily in research and 
development (R&D) and intellectual capital, thereby benefiting from opportunities to 
cluster and share information. To prepare for future economic growth, the City can 
support the activation of space within existing clusters (such as media and finance) as 
well as future innovation clusters, which will be dynamic, mixed-use urban business 
districts that benefit from sharing knowledge and resources, across the five boroughs. 

This report defines innovation industries as those that:
•  Derive their primary value from intellectual capital and creativity, and thereby place a strong premium on talent

•  Invest heavily in R&D of new business models, harness new technologies, or leverage old technologies in new ways

•  Disrupt the status quo to create new markets, often by collaborating across disciplines or with public or 

academic partners

These industries include: 

Advanced Manufacturing 
(including Clean Tech)

Design

Advertising, Media,  
and Arts

E-Commerce

Biotech/Life Sciences

Tech and Information

51

Industry Expansion & Cultivationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Supporting Initiatives
A. Maintain and grow New York City’s traditional economic sectors

New York City’s traditional sectors are key engines of economic growth, job creation, 
tax revenue, and foreign investment. These sectors, which include finance, 
entertainment, fashion, and higher education, face a number of challenges as they 
seek to expand or maintain their footprints within their existing geographic areas. To 
ease these challenges, the City will examine strategies to support office development 
in Central Business Districts (CBDs) throughout New York City, including both 
traditional and growing CBDs. Strategies for preserving and growing these 
commercial districts include zoning mechanisms for supporting new development 
and activating existing commercial corridors. 

For example, the entertainment industry in New York is critical to maintaining 
our economic competitiveness and ability to attract residents, tourists, and 
businesses. It is also a key source of direct economic activity and jobs, and is one 
of the city’s strongest and most unique traditional sectors. Broadway ticket sales 
alone were $1.4 billion in 2014. During the 2012-2013 season, the Broadway 
industry contributed $11.9 billion to the city’s economy and supported 87,000 jobs. 
Film and television production in the city are also at an all-time high, currently 
generating a direct annual spend of $7.1 billion, $400 million in tax revenue, and 
130,000 jobs. With this activity, the need for commercial spaces for these 
industries is also at an all-time high. The City will leverage its assets and strategic 
partnerships to activate the types of spaces required to maintain and grow the 
entertainment industry. 

New York City’s fashion industry employs more than 183,000 people, accounting 
for 5.5 percent of the city’s workforce and generating $11 billion in total wages, 
with tax revenues of $1.35 billion. An estimated 900 fashion companies are 
headquartered in the city, and in 2013, there were approximately 13,800 fashion 
firms with a presence. New York City is home to more than 75 major-fashion trade 
shows, plus thousands of showrooms. We can help maintain the city’s status as a 
fashion-industry leader by supporting the sector and fostering new businesses 
across the spectrum from design to manufacturing. 

B. Ensure that businesses in emerging sectors are able to find and fit out the 

space they need to start, grow, and scale their companies

In addition to support for traditional sectors, the City is studying ways to respond 
to changing patterns in the way we live and work. For instance, a hallmark of the 
innovation economy is the number of self-employed and freelance workers, with 
nearly 834,000 freelancers in 2012. These jobs require workspace, which can be 
found through high-cost co-working facilities or by working at home. 
Approximately 52,000 individuals or 21 percent of self-employed workers in New 
York City worked from home in 2013. With a focus on alleviating barriers to 
entrepreneurship and business-to-business or business-to-customer interaction, 

52

Industry Expansion & Cultivationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Employment  
Centers Outside of 
Manhattan Core

The continued growth of employ-
ment centers across the city is one 
way in which the city’s economy, 
strong and robust in its core and 
in its traditional sectors, contin-
ues to diversify across the city 
and into new innovative sectors. 
The areas outside Manhattan 
now make up a larger share of the 
city’s employment than they did 
before the recession.

Some of the city’s more dense em-
ployment centers that are the focus 
of targeted investment and planning 
are pictured in the map above.

Note: Based on analysis of 2011 LEHD data 
for census tracts outside of Manhattan core 
with job density greater than 50,000 workers 
per square mile. Highest employment density 
census tract in Staten Island included.

Source: 2011 US Census Bureau LEHD 2011

we are completing a study to identify new real estate development concepts that 
allow for live-work arrangements such as live-work apartments, live-work 
buildings, or live-work districts.

The mechanisms for increasing availability of affordable, flexible commercial 
space might include providing a loan guarantee for upgrades to underutilized or 
underinvested commercial and/or industrial loft space; strategically activating 
City-owned property for targeted commercial uses; designing new zoning 
approaches; creating financing vehicles for development; and considering ways to 
complement existing incentives. 

Employment Centers 
Outside of Manhattan Core

Potential Rail Corridors/
Stops

Existing SBS Corridors

Planned SBS Corridors

Existing Ferry Network 

Proposed Ferry Network/
Stops

NYCT Subway

Potential Subway 
Expansion

Priority Subway Signal 
Enhancements

125th Street

St George

Sunset Park

Hutchinson Metro Center

LGA Airport

Downtown Flushing

Long Island City

Queens Center

DUMBO/
Brooklyn Navy Yard
Downtown Brooklyn

Jamaica

JFK Airport

Initiative 2
Make triple bottom line investments in infrastructure 
and City-owned assets to capture economic, 
environmental, and social returns

The City will identify opportunities to maximize economic, environmental, and 
social returns (the triple bottom line) in capital planning and investments in City-
owned assets. The initiatives below detail the City’s intent to invest in City-owned 
assets, while initiatives related to infrastructure planning are detailed in the 
Infrastructure Planning and Management goal.

53

Industry Expansion & Cultivationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City East Midtown 
East Midtown has long been the global capital of commerce, but the quality and capacity 
of its office space does not meet the demands of modern tenants. Modern tenants seek new 
buildings with open floor plans and high floor-to-ceiling heights, but the average age of 
buildings in the East Midtown area is over 75 years. 

In May 2014, the City announced a two-track approach to protecting and strengthening East 
Midtown’s role as the world’s premiere business district. The first step was a focused proposal 
for the Vanderbilt Corridor between 42nd and 47th Streets. In exchange for permitting 
additional square feet for development, the City will provide an option for developers to make 
specific improvements in the area’s transit-oriented pedestrian circulation and public realm. 

This proposal has since been approved by the City Planning Commission and is currently 
before the City Council. The first building seeking approval pursuant to this approach is 
One Vanderbilt. The developer will provide more than $200 million in public space and 
transit improvements for the Grand Central Terminal subway station in return for increased 
development rights. The second stage for a broader proposal for the entire East Midtown 
district is being examined through a longer-term, stakeholder-driven process. A task force 
led by Manhattan Borough President Gale Brewer and Council Member Dan Garodnick will 
provide recommendations to the Department of City Planning later this year.

Applied Sciences
Applied Sciences New York City is the ambitious initiative to build and expand world-class 
applied sciences and engineering campuses in New York City. The campuses will more than 
double the number of full-time applied science graduate students and faculty members and 
create a projected 48,000 jobs over the next 30 years. In addition, the campuses will not only 
create jobs and enrich the City’s existing research capabilities, but also lead to innovative 
ideas that can be commercialized, catalyzing the establishment of an anticipated 1,000+ spin-
off companies over the next thirty years. This increases the probability that the next high 
growth company—a Google, Amazon, or Facebook—will emerge right here in Silicon Alley. 

Laboratory Space for Early State Life Sciences and 
Research and Development Companies
With $1.4 billion in annual National Institutes of Health funding across nine academic 
medical centers, New York City is positioned to play a transformative role in early-stage life 
sciences R&D. In fact, there has been a 15 percent total increase in life sciences jobs since 
2009, bringing the total to more than 13,000 jobs and one million square feet of life sciences 
R&D laboratory space. However, this is significantly less than the 50,000 jobs and 10 million 
square feet in life science hubs such as Boston and Cambridge, Massachusetts. To achieve 
a critical mass of life sciences activity and to support roughly 10,000 new commercial life 
science jobs, we need an additional four to five million square feet of laboratory space. We will 
maximize the potential of City-owned assets to catalyze the development of critically needed 
wet lab space in proximity to key anchor institutions and hubs for the sector. Additionally, the 
City will consider zoning and other non-capital intensive measures to spur the development 
of this type of space.

54

Industry Expansion & Cultivationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Supporting an Advanced Manufacturing 
Network
New York City is well-positioned to become a center for innovation in 
advanced manufacturing. Our traditional industrial businesses are adopting 
new technologies and practices to increase production efficiency and overall 
competitiveness, while the startups driving these advancements are benefiting 
from New York City’s entrepreneurial talent pool, academic research, 
and access to markets. The City will support the creation of an Advanced 
Manufacturing Network, which will link traditional and emerging firms to 
resources across the tech ecosystem. The City will also invest in  
state-of-the-art facilities that will house high-tech equipment, affordable  
workspaces, business support services, and workforce training programs.  
The centers will help businesses reduce their upfront costs by sharing high-
cost technologies needed for innovation in today’s manufacturing sector,  
such as 3D printers and robotics equipment. Such investments will ensure 
New York City’s manufacturing firms and workforce remain competitive in  
the 21st century economy.  

Invest in Fashion Manufacturing and 
Innovation Hub
The City will help the fashion manufacturing industry, especially the 
garment production business, transition to a more sustainable cluster model, 
which will offer access to more affordable real estate and workforce training 
opportunities to enhance skills. For example, the City invested $3.5 million 
to support Manufacture New York to fit-out and modernize a 160,000 square 
foot space in Sunset Park, Brooklyn. This hub will include:  

•  A workforce development center to help train workers to develop fashion 

production skills and receive placements in on-site, high quality jobs 

•  A research and development center to help create new materials and 

wearable technologies

•  A small-batch factory specializing in print-making and sample productions

•  A design accelerator to create an educated pipeline of fashion and 

manufacturing talent

•  Incubator space containing 12 private studios, classroom space, conference 
rooms, a computer lab, an industrial sewing room, storage, and work areas 
for 50 designers

The creation of this hub represents the City’s commitment to encourage 
innovation and partnership between the public and private sectors. Such 
investments ensure that companies at the cutting edge of the fashion 
industry can grow and innovate right here in New York City. 

55

Industry Expansion & Cultivationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Supporting Initiatives
A. Support a state-of-the-art food production and distribution industry

Hunts Point Food Distribution Center (HPFDC) is one of the largest food-distribution 
centers in the world, occupying 329 acres and housing more than 115 firms. We will 
support the modernization and upgrade of Hunts Point to create space for food 
retailers and wholesalers serving the city. Currently, 60 percent of the city’s produce 
and 50 percent of meat and fish pass through the HPFDC, which directly employs 
8,000 people and is responsible for many other indirect jobs and positive economic 
spillover effects in the Hunts Point Peninsula and throughout the South Bronx. By 
investing in modernizing and improving resiliency for the public markets and other 
HPFDC properties, Hunts Point will be better prepared for power outages, coastal 
flooding, job losses, and other disruptions that could come from extreme storm events 
to the citywide food distribution system. Moreover, at the adjacent Hunts Point 
Wastewater Treatment Plant, the New York City Department of Environmental 
Protection (DEP) is working to replace sludge digesters with a new design that could 
potentially take the food waste from HPFDC and use it as a source of energy for a 
local microgrid. Additionally, the City will work with the New York State Department 
of Transportation (NYSDOT) to make efforts to reconfigure the Bruckner-Sheridan 
Interchange and Sheridan Expressway to improve truck access to the HPFDC. 
HPFDC will anchor a world-class food cluster in Hunts Point Peninsula—with 
economic benefits for the South Bronx as well—thus strengthening the entire 
citywide food-distribution system. 

B. Activate the City’s industrial assets to support the creation of quality jobs 

The City will renovate and redevelop City-owned industrial assets to maximize their 
economic development potential as well as their positive outcomes. The City will 
prioritize the creation of high-quality jobs as well as the activation of job-intensive 
uses within its industrial properties. 

Initiative 3
Foster an environment in which small businesses can succeed 

Small businesses are critical to the city’s growth, providing entrepreneurial and 
employment opportunities to New Yorkers; delivering important local services; and 
attracting residents and visitors by adding to the urban fabric that makes New York 
City so compelling. Recognizing the importance of small businesses to the City’s 
economy and character, New York City will seek to address the challenges they 
experience in starting and expanding. In recent years, small businesses (with fewer 
than 100 employees) and very small businesses (with fewer than 20 employees) have 
grown more rapidly than large businesses, in terms of percentage change in number 
of establishments. Small businesses, especially neighborhood retailers, support 
economic mobility for a diverse range of New Yorkers, from immigrant families to 
low-income entrepreneurs looking for a pathway to the middle class. 

56

Industry Expansion & Cultivationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Brooklyn Navy Yard 
The City has made a $76.8 million capital investment to upgrade 
Building 77, a one million square-foot building in the Brooklyn Navy 
Yard (BNY). The investment, along with an additional $63.2 million 
from other sources, for a total of $140 million, will transform this un-
derutilized warehouse into a modern facility to accommodate both 
active manufacturing and technology-based businesses. This renno-
vation will increase an additional 3,000 jobs will be created through 
this renovation, accounting for more than a 40 percent increase in 
employment at BNY. Not only will this increase capacity at BNY, 
which has had a 100 percent occupancy rate for over a decade, the 
City will also expand the on-site job training center in partnership 
with the local philanthropic community. The companies at the Yard 
will have the space they need, as well as a talented workforce with 
the skills for a 21st century economy. 

Building 77 is a big part of the BNY’S  current expansion, the largest 
since World War II. Other significant projects include: 

1. Green Manufacturing Center: A $67 million, 250,000 square-

foot adaptive reuse of a former machine-shop building

2. Steiner Studios: New York City’s anchor for the film and televi-
sion industry will create a next-generation media campus com-
plete with pre-and post-production studios 

3. Admiral’s Row: A site that will house a 74,000 square-foot grocery 

store, topped by 127,000 square feet of light-industrial space, 
89,000 square feet of additional retail space, and a 7,000 square-
foot office/community facility

All initiatives underway underscore BNY’s mission to support the 
growth of well-paying, modern industrial jobs and ensure positive 
community impact. Through the work of its Employment Center, 
BNY will ensure these opportunities are available to local residents.

Supporting Initiative
A. Reduce the regulatory burden on small 

businesses through the Small Business First plan

Small Business First is a comprehensive plan to 
reduce the regulatory burden on small businesses 
in New York City. It will leverage a $27 million 
investment over the next five years to simplify the 
regulatory hurdles many small businesses face in 
opening and operating. It will improve communica-
tion between business owners and City govern-
ment; streamline licensing, permitting and tribunal 
processes; provide support and resources to help 
businesses understand and comply with City 
regulations; and ensure assistance is accessible to 
all communities across the five boroughs. 

Small Business First includes thirty initiatives 
developed as a direct result of conversations with 
stakeholders, advocates, small business owners, 
community leaders, and elected officials represent-
ing a diverse slate of city neighborhoods. In total, 
more than 600 unique comments and ideas were 
solicited, detailing the specific needs of small 
businesses in communities across the five bor-
oughs. As a result, Small Business First initiatives 
will include:

•  Consolidating locations for businesses to find and 

process applications, permits, and information 
across agencies—both in person and online

•  Creating one place—both in-person and online—

for business owners to settle the majority of 
fines and violations

•  Helping businesses navigate regulatory pro-

cesses such as providing pre-inspection walk-
throughs to help them comply before receiving 
fines or violations

•  Translating resources and information materials 

into multiple languages 

57

Industry Expansion & Cultivationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City INDICATORS + TARGETS

 Increase workforce 
participation rate from 
current rate of  
61 percent

 Increase the number of 
individuals receiving City-
sponsored, industry-focused 
training each year to 30,000 
by 2020

 Increase the number of 
New York City public 
school graduates attaining 
associate’s or bachelor’s 
degrees 

Workforce Development

Goal: New York City will have a workforce 
equipped with the skills needed to participate in 
the 21st century economy 

Overview
All able New Yorkers should have the opportunity to participate in the 
workforce, with access to stable, high-quality employment. 

During the recession, New York City workers experienced flat or declining wages, 
except for those in select high-wage sectors. However, since 2014, more workers 
have started to see wage gains, due to increased employment and demand for labor 
across a range of sectors. Nonetheless, these gains have not fully offset the wage 
stagnation that occurred during the recession. For example, in 2014, inflation-
adjusted average annual wages were 2.1 percent lower than in 2007 for private, 
non-financial workers. Consequently, low-income New Yorkers continue to struggle 
with the city’s high living costs. Without the qualifications to advance to mid-wage 
jobs, these individuals and their families are likely to remain in poverty. Recognizing 
that high-, mid-, and low-skill jobs are all part of a diverse, healthy economy, the 
City is committed to supporting job quality across all sectors, as well as increasing 
wages and access to Paid Sick Leave and Family Leave for low-wage jobs.

The City’s new Career Pathways strategy aims to create a more inclusive 
workforce, comprised of individuals from a range of backgrounds in all five 
boroughs. Through Career Pathways, the City is committed to providing New 
Yorkers with opportunities to enter the workforce and achieve economic stability, 
regardless of their starting skill level or educational attainment. To realize this 
vision of a more inclusive workforce, the City will support training programs that 
give people who historically struggle to enter the labor market the skills needed for 
entry-level work, as well as support the career advancement of low- and middle-skill 
New Yorkers. The Career Pathways strategy rests on the creation of a more 
comprehensive, integrated workforce development system and policy framework 
that supports agencies in effectively coordinating to help workers gain skills and 
progress in their careers. 

The City can leverage its purchasing power and investments to train and 
employ New Yorkers, including those investments envisioned by OneNYC. 
Each year, the City spends billions of dollars on infrastructure, goods, and services. 
We can promote targeted hiring to employ and train New Yorkers of all skill levels 
and qualifications, including those who experience the greatest challenges to stable 
employment. We will provide these individuals with enhanced training and support 
to increase their participation in the labor market and build relevant skills. 

58

nyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Talent Needs and Qualifications

Industry 

Partnerships

Jobs

Skills

Career  
Pathways

Employer 
Demand

Career Pathways’ workforce 
development feedback loop

Employment

Job-Relevant Training and Education

Labor
Supply

The City additionally recognizes that postsecondary attainment is critical to 
improving workforce participation and alleviating poverty. Workers with 
higher educational attainment demonstrate lower unemployment rates and higher 
median weekly earnings. For example, workers with a bachelor’s degree had an 
unemployment rate of 4.0 percent, compared to 7.5 percent for workers with a high 
school diploma and 11.0 percent for workers with less than a high school diploma. 
Likewise, based on median weekly earnings, workers with a bachelor’s degree made 
more than twice as much as workers with less than a high school diploma. By 
investing in increasing postsecondary attainment, we can empower our residents to 
join the workforce and thrive.

Initiative 1
Train New Yorkers in high-growth industries, creating 
an inclusive workforce across the city 

The Career Pathways report identifies six target sectors for the City’s workforce 
development efforts, including Healthcare, Technology, Industrial/Manufacturing, 
Construction, Retail, and Food Service, which account for about half of all jobs in 
New York City. These sectors offer economic mobility and/or significant potential 
for both employer and worker benefits through improvements in job quality. They  
were chosen based on analysis of tax revenue, recent job growth, forecasted job 
growth, total employment, jobs multipliers, wages, and wage distributions. 
Healthcare and Technology are high-growth sectors that offer higher-wage, middle-
skill jobs. The Industrial/Manufacturing and Construction sectors represent 
lower-growth sectors that offer relatively well-paying jobs that do not necessarily 
require high educational attainment. Finally, the Retail and Food Service sectors 
represent high-growth sectors that employ a large part of the workforce, thus 
providing the opportunity to aid significant numbers of New Yorkers through 
improvements in job quality. 

59

Workforce Developmentnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Supporting Initiatives
A. Establish and expand Industry Partnerships 

Reflecting our commitment to enhanced industry-focused training, we will create 
four new Industry Partnerships focused on the Industrial/Manufacturing, 
Construction, Retail, and Food-Service sectors. The program will be modeled 
after the City’s two existing Industry Partnerships in Technology and Healthcare, 
specifically the Tech Talent Pipeline and New York Alliance for Careers in 
Healthcare programs. Partnerships are teams of trusted industry experts focused 
on addressing the mismatches of labor supply and demand in each sector. They 
formalize feedback loops between education, training, and employers, and 
mobilize outside resources to address the needs of supply and demand. The 
Partnerships will convene public and private stakeholders to develop curricula 
and training programs that match industry needs. They will be located within 
City government or be competitively contracted. 

B. Use Common Metrics for workforce programs

The City will pursue a system-wide effort to align definitions and data among 
workforce development agencies and build a shared system to collect data across 
all workforce programs. This will allow for evaluation of programs and 
longitudinal study of the impact of training and investments.

C. Create bridge programs to prepare low-skill job seekers 

Bridge programs serve individuals not yet ready for college, training, or career-
track jobs, typically scoring below tenth-grade literacy levels. The Career 
Pathways program will develop bridge programs to help New Yorkers obtain the 
academic credentials, experience, and technical skills required to secure entry-
level work and advance into skilled training.

D. Ease the path to employment for formerly incarcerated people

People with a criminal history are often excluded from employment opportunities 
because they are required to disclose their background on job applications, thus 
may miss the chance to gain an interview and be considered for hire. A policy 
adopted by City government, and other cities around the nation, removes this 
upfront disclosure requirement so that an individual’s full range of skills and 
attributes can be considered before making a hiring decision. The City supports 
pending local legislation to extend this policy to private sector employers.

60

Workforce Developmentnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Workforce Skills Training 

Initiative 2
Leverage OneNYC investments to train and employ New 
Yorkers of all skill levels 

OneNYC envisions major investments in housing and infrastructure. These 
investments present a valuable opportunity to support training and employment for 
New Yorkers, which advance their careers and build a more inclusive workforce that 
creates pathways for those who have historically experienced high rates of 
unemployment. 

Supporting Initiatives
A. Leverage City investments to create jobs and training opportunities for 

New Yorkers, and encourage targeted hiring 

The City will expand targeted hiring programs that encourage targeted hiring  
and establish a “First Look” process that requires employers receiving City 
contracts to review and consider local qualified workers. In pursuing targeted 
hiring, the City will build on the model of the Sandy Recovery Hiring Plan, which 
ensures housing recovery projects create construction jobs and training 
opportunities for New Yorkers who were economically impacted by Hurricane 
Sandy. An online portal will support this and other targeted hiring programs to 
facilitate interaction and data exchange, and provide feedback regarding hiring 
and recruiting. The portal will create a real time loop that allows the City to use 
employer input to better prepare and assist candidates.

In addition, the City will support the use of Project Labor Agreements to increase the 
number of New York City residents that have access to middle-class jobs in the 
unionized construction industry. For example, the City recently launched a new New 
York City Housing Authority (NYCHA) $3.5 billion Project Labor Agreement, through 
which it is expanding its commitment to linking NYCHA residents, minorities, 
women, veterans, and high school students to the unionized construction industry. 

“…There need to be more 
internship opportunities 
for those just starting 
out… and training 
programs that are 
extremely focused on 
entering the workforce… 
for people who… can’t 
find work that focus[es] 
on specialized, specific 
skills required to land 
jobs in certain areas.”

—Jesse W., Manhattan

B. Capitalize on the Career Pathways Construction Industry Partnership to 

create and expand construction training and employment opportunities for 
traditionally underrepresented New Yorkers 

The City will establish a new Construction Industry Partnership to help qualified 
residents from targeted neighborhoods connect to construction jobs. The City 
will work with labor unions, construction firms, contractors, and developers to 
improve referral and recruiting systems that link New Yorkers to construction 
jobs. The model will be built on current successful pre-apprenticeship training 
programs such as the Edward J. Malloy Initiative for Construction Skills, a 
partnership among construction unions, the City, and union construction 
contractors to connect New York City’s youth to pre-apprenticeship programs. As 
part of this effort, the City will support construction training programs to help 

61

Workforce Developmentnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City traditionally under represented populations enter and thrive in this industry. 
These training programs will benefit inexperienced young adults, veterans, 
women, NYCHA residents, and low-income individuals, as well as 
underemployed construction workers. It will include pre-apprenticeship training 
for workers entering the field, including both adults and out-of-school/out-of-
work youth, as well as skills-upgrade training for existing workers. The 
Partnership will also explore opportunities to expand access to design, 
construction management, and other construction-related careers.

C. Support the creation of, and training for, green jobs 

The City will create jobs to maintain growing investment in green infrastructure. 
The Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) plans to hire 260 
maintenance and horticultural workers by June 2018 to monitor and maintain the 
agency’s growing number of bioswales and other stormwater-management tools 
in public areas, including the right-of-way, parks, schools, and NYCHA properties. 
DEP’s goal to have 9,000 bioswales in place by June 2018 is the first milestone in 
its plan to decrease impermeable surfaces and improve stormwater management 
in New York City. These entry-level jobs will provide workers with opportunities 
for further professional advancement within DEP, and be coupled with a separate 
City program to train 10,000 building operators in the latest energy-efficiency 
principles and practices by 2025. The program will help operators develop their 
skills and gain access to new work opportunities and, at the same time, help 
reduce the city’s emissions and better manage its energy demands. While this 
program will focus on providing green operations and maintenance training 
opportunities to non-union workers, the City will collaborate with Union 32BJ 
and Local 94 to develop and share best-in-class curricula specific to New York 
City’s built environment. The program will also support the development of 
energy benchmarking and monitoring tools to ensure that we can track progress 
of greenhouse gas emissions reduction goals and key performance indicators.

“Our schools must be able 
to provide not only 
books, but Internet 
access, and information-
literacy instruction if we 
hope to have successful 
students who are ready 
for college and careers 
upon graduation.”

—Stephanie R, Queens

Initiative 3
Ensure all New York City students have access to an 
education that enables them to build 21st century skills 
through real-world, work-based learning experiences

We are committed to preparing our students for the 21st century global economy 
through greater access to educational opportunities in computer science and related 
disciplines; Career and Technical Education (CTE) Programs; bilingual learning 
environments; support for college- and degree-attainment; and connections 
between schools and relevant businesses and industries to provide students with an 
on-ramp to a career.

62

Workforce Developmentnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Career and technical education in schools

Supporting Initiatives

A. Significantly expand access to computer science/technology education 

across New York City public schools by 2020

Recognizing the high demand for talent and education in the technology sector, 
we have made great strides in expanding access to educational opportunities in 
computer science and related disciplines. The Department of Education (DOE) is 
launching a comprehensive, standards-aligned computer-science and software-
engineering education program, the Software Engineering Pilot, for grades 6 
through 12. The goals of the program, launched in 2013 are to increase the number 
of high school graduates ready to enter new and emerging high-tech fields, and 
develop students’ computational thinking and problem-solving skills in real-
world contexts. The Department of Small Business Services (SBS) launched the 
Tech Talent Pipeline to support the growth of the city’s businesses and prepare 
New Yorkers for 21st century jobs. We are committed to expanding these efforts 
even further. We have convened an advisory committee to define an ambitious 
vision for technology education in our schools, along with specific programs and 
goals to ensure our students have the skills they need to succeed in a 21st century 
economy. This group is working to develop a detailed strategy and will be 
releasing plans later this school year. 

B. Strengthen and expand Career and Technical Education programs 

CTE programs are valuable, high impact programs on par with college 
preparatory programs and a critical part of the current New York City workforce 
development plan, codified in the Career Pathways report. These programs, 
which are formalized academic and technical education opportunities, prepare 
enrolled students for a seamless transition into postsecondary opportunities in 
two- or four-year degree programs, further training, apprenticeships, and entry-
level work. Approximately 120,000 New York City public high school students 
take part in CTE programs each year. To address challenges related to space and 
access to necessary technology, DOE will invest in building sustainable systems 
that strengthen current offerings and add capacity within existing and new CTE 
programs to ensure high-quality instruction aligned with industry expectations. 
We will also develop and launch new, leading-edge CTE programs within existing 
schools in order to benefit more students. 

C. Expand Transition Coordination Centers to every borough by 2020 to 

improve postsecondary outcomes for students with disabilities 

Given the focus on developing opportunities for all students to access work-based 
learning opportunities, it is critical to identify and enable students who may not 
be able to access these traditional opportunities. To empower these students to 
pursue postsecondary opportunities, we will consider expanding our Transition 
Coordination Centers, which provide disabled students with work-based learning 
opportunities, assessments, and professional learning experiences. Currently, 

63

Workforce Developmentnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City these centers serve only a small fraction of the population—between 500 and 800 
of the 235,000 students receiving special-education services annually—and are 
available at one location in the city.

D. Explore the opportunity to create bilingual learning environments to 

promote multilingualism among New York City students

The 21st century global economy demands a bilingual learning environment for all 
New York City students. At the same time, the population of English-Language 
Learners (ELLs) is growing and would be better supported in a bilingual learning 
environment. The State and City have undertaken multiple initiatives to address 
these challenges and better prepare our students based on their language- and 
literacy-learning needs. We are constantly re-evaluating an ELL initiatives to 
include more innovative models and expand on others that have been proven to 
promote academic success. As part of DOE’s commitment to student achievement 
and increasing access to multilingual programs across the city, we will open 40 
dual-language programs during the 2015-2016 school year.

The City has recognized that expanding tech education across our school system cannot 
be done without the help of industry partners who demand specific skills in our 21st cen-
tury economy. As such, the Department of Education has already instituted the following 
programs and intends to expand its strategy with private sector partners:

A. Preparing 100 high school teachers to teach a new AP Computer Science Principles 

course in partnership with the University of California at Berkeley and the Educational 
Development Corporation, and funded by the National Science Foundation

B. Preparing 50 middle and 130 high school teachers through the Blended Learning 

Institute on Exploring Computer Science and Project GUTS (Growing Up Thinking 
Scientifically) curricula in partnership with code.org

C. Expanding access to successful computer-science/coding curricula and programs run 

with partners such as CSNYC and Microsoft (e.g., Technology Education and Literacy in 
Schools, Bootstrap, ScriptEd)

D.  Ensure that every New York City high school has at least one university and/or industry 

partnership so that all students have robust college and career experiences throughout 
their high school experience

64

Workforce Developmentnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 4
Increase postsecondary attainment

Supporting efforts to increase postsecondary attainment is key to the City’s goal to 
lift New Yorkers out of poverty and strengthen an inclusive workforce. To achieve 
this goal, we are committed to increasing the number of New York City public 
school graduates attaining associate’s or bachelor’s degrees. This initiative 
complements other strategies to lift New Yorkers out of poverty, as part of a 
complete set of actions that the City will pursue to reach this goal. 

Strategies to increase postsecondary attainment begin in high school, where the City 
will work to increase access to college-specific advising. Efforts to improve advising 
are intended to promote high school graduation and college matriculation. Based on a 
study by the Research Alliance for New York City Schools, 59 percent of public school 
graduates enrolled in postsecondary education programs in 2006: 16 percent in the 
City University of New York (CUNY) 4-year, 13 percent in CUNY 2-year, and 30 
percent non-CUNY. The City will take a comprehensive approach to advising, 
ensuring that it continues beyond high school, to college. In college, the City will 
expand programs designed to assist students in completing their degrees. 

Increased advising enables students to better access the myriad resources available to 
them in both high school and college, as counselors are often the primary source of 
information about the resources and services available to students. While progress has 
been made to improve the ratio of guidance counselors to students in New York City’s 
public schools, there is still a significant need for counselors who have been trained to 
advise students on postsecondary options. In many schools, guidance counselors have 
caseloads of up to 500 students, and not all schools have designated college counselors. 

For New York City public high school students, the DOE is partnering with the 
Goddard Riverside Community Center to train new counselors and educators on the 
college advisement process. This and other efforts are intended to support a target 
of one trained counselor for every 35 high school seniors. 

Once in college, students may require additional help completing their degrees. Of 
New York City public high school graduates who started at CUNY in 2006 and 2007, 
53 percent completed the CUNY 4-year program and 13 percent completed the 
CUNY 2-year program. At CUNY, Accelerated Study in Associate Programs (ASAP) 
assists students in earning associate degrees within three years. ASAP participants 
are more than two times as likely to graduate as their peers. ASAP also increases 
credits earned, lowers the cost per degree, and raises the number of students 
transferring to four-year colleges. Building on the success of this program, we are 
committed to expanding ASAP to serve 13,000 students over the next three years.

The success of these programs will help to build a well-prepared workforce, and 
enable more New Yorkers to participate in the City’s economic prosperity through 
quality jobs and careers.

65

Workforce Developmentnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Housing

Goal: New Yorkers will have access to affordable, 
high-quality housing coupled with robust 
infrastructure and neighborhood services

Overview
Housing is in high demand and short supply, as the population continues to grow 
and housing production lags behind demand. Despite a total supply of 3.4 million 
housing units, the largest New York City’s housing stock has ever been, the vacancy 
rate was only 3.45 percent in 2014, well below the legal definition of a housing 
emergency (a vacancy rate below 5 percent).

In 2014, almost 56 percent of New York City renter households were rent 
burdened, defined as paying more than a third of their income toward housing 
costs. More than 30 percent of renter households were severely burdened, defined 
as paying more than half of their income toward rent. This trend is a result of 
stagnating wages and increasing costs over the past 20 years. As described above, 
the creation of new housing supply at all income levels will help to alleviate this 
pressure and contribute to housing affordability in the city. The initiatives below 
support housing preservation and production, emphasizing Housing New York’s 
focus on affordability and the City’s commitments to support overall housing 
production. Additionally, we are committed to pursuing strategies for mitigating 
homelessness, beginning with the provision of support services for the city’s most 
vulnerable populations. Initiatives discussed in Vision 4 address our commitment 
to strengthening the capacity of homeowners, landlords, renters, and tenants 
affected by Hurricane Sandy. 

INDICATORS + TARGETS

  Accommodate 8.4 million 
households within the 
region by 2040, an increase 
of 1.1 million households 

 Finance the new construc-
tion of 80,000 affordable 
housing units and preserva-
tion of 120,000 affordable 
housing units by 2024

 Support the creation of 
240,00 total new housing 
units (both affordable and 
market rate) by 2024 and 
an additional 250,000 to 
300,000 by 2040

Rent Burden
56 percent of renters are rent burdened and three in 10 
households are severely rent-burdened, paying half or more 
of their income to rent and utilities 

Housing production across the metropolitan area has also 
lagged behind demand, adversely affecting the region’s 
competitiveness as employers across diverse sectors seek to 
locate in areas that provide varied housing options for their 
workforce. As the region continues to grow, reaching 22 
million residents in total by 2040, the City will seek to 
coordinate with regional partners to stimulate the production 
of housing to meet demand and relieve the burden on 
families of all income levels. 

= severely rent-burdened household

= rent-burdened household

= unburdened household

Source: New York City Housing and Vacancy Survey, 2014

66

nyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Sherman Creek/Inwood
Manhattan

Jerome Avenue Corridor
The Bronx

East Harlem
Manhattan

Neighborhood planning studies in 
support of Housing New York

Neighborhood Study Areas

Potential Rail Corridors/Stops

Existing SBS Corridors

Planned SBS Corridors

Existing Ferry Network

Proposed Ferry Network/Stops

Potential Subway Expansion

Priority Subway Signal Enhancements

NYCT Subway

Bay Street Corridor
Staten Island

Flushing West
Queens
Long Island City Core
Queens

East New York
Brooklyn

Source: DCP

Initiative 1
Create and preserve 200,000 affordable housing units 
over ten years to alleviate New Yorkers’ rent burden and 
meet the needs of a diverse population. Support efforts 
by the private market to produce 160,000 additional 
new units of housing over ten years to accommodate a 
growing population. 

The City is committed to an ambitious goal to alleviate New York City’s housing 
affordability crisis by creating and preserving 200,000 units of affordable housing over 
the next ten years. With this as a cornerstone of the city’s mission, we will produce 
opportunities to create housing, and engage communities in planning processes to 
accommodate growth in neighborhoods across our city. 

67

Housingnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Housing 9 Million New Yorkers by 2040
To accommodate a population of over nine million New Yorkers by 2040, the city 
will need at least 3.7 million housing units throughout the five boroughs. The city’s 
population growth is driven by its desirability as a place to live and work. With-
out the production of new housing, this population growth drives housing prices 
upward, as new New Yorkers compete with current residents for a limited supply 
of existing housing units. To ensure all New Yorkers have access to housing they 
can afford, we must not only produce and preserve affordable units but increase the 
overall supply of all types of new housing. 

Housing New York, the City’s ambitious ten-year housing plan, forms a foundation 
for creating and preserving 200,000 affordable housing units over the next ten years. 
The City will also support creation of 160,000 additional new units over the same 
period. This level of production will accomplish three key objectives to alleviate New 
York City’s housing crisis: accommodate a growing population, ease supply con-
straints, and offset loss in the housing market as units are taken offline, demolished, 
or converted to non-residential units. To meet demand and continue to alleviate 
the housing crisis, the City estimates it will need to support creation of 250,000 to 
300,000 new units from 2025 to 2040. 

Like New York City, other mature major U.S. and global cities are continuing to 
accommodate population growth and manage affordability challenges through in-
creased density, new housing typologies, expansion into surrounding land area, and 
smart infrastructure and technology investments. Many of these strategies point the 
way for our future growth.

•  London plans to accommodate population growth from 8.2 million residents in 
2011 to 10.1 million residents in 2036 by developing significant areas of vacant or 
underutilized land in coordination with transportation improvements, intensify-
ing uses in town centers, and pursuing regional coordination. 

•  San Francisco anticipates growth in the Bay Area to 9.3 million residents by 2040, 
from 7.1 million people in 2010. Regional housing production efforts will focus on 
housing for low-and middle-income households, concentrating development in ex-
isting neighborhoods that can accommodate growth with access to public transit, 
housing, jobs, and services, while preserving surrounding natural resources. 

•  Projecting a population of 6.5 to 6.9 million by 2030, from 5.5 million in 2014, Sin-
gapore plans to meet this demand by intensifying land use in new developments, 
recycling land currently occupied by low-intensity uses, and creating additional 
developable area through infill. 

New York City can accommodate the number of units planned and future units 
required to meet the need. The locations most likely to be suitable for substantial 
numbers of new units are key areas close to public transit. Increased density can 

68

Housingnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City build on the strengths of neighborhoods to improve quality of life, especially when 
aligned with targeted investments in public and private infrastructure. 

Housing New York lays out a number of strategies to achieve these goals. These in-
clude engaging communities in neighborhood planning processes in all five boroughs 
to coordinate land-use and zoning changes, maximizing the use of City-owned land 
for new development of affordable housing, and effectively using City financing tools 
to expedite development of new housing and ensure the continued long-term afford-
ability of existing affordable units. 

Additionally, the City will: 

•  Pursue large-scale development on sites that may have been previously overlooked 
or present more complex opportunities for redevelopment, such as Sunnyside Yards

•  Align new housing development with investments in public transit, to help New 

Yorkers reach critical services and their places of employment

•  Support the growth of employment clusters in areas accessible to significant popu-
lations, providing New Yorkers with access to good jobs within a suitable commute 

69

Housingnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Supporting Initiatives
A. Maximize the use of City-owned land for new housing 

The New Infill Homeownership Opportunities Program (NIHOP) seeks to 
promote creation of mixed-income communities with affordable homeownership 
opportunities for moderate-and middle-income households in new one- to 
four-family homes and small (less than 15 units) condominiums/cooperatives. 
The City will target small developers and local community development 
corporations to participate in the program and work with financial institutions to 
develop homes in neighborhoods that lack affordable homeownership 
opportunities. We will also launch the Neighborhood Construction Program 
(NCP), an initiative to aggregate sites to develop affordable housing in order to 
achieve economies of scale in the remediation, development, financing, and 
operation of scattered infill lots for rental housing. Both NIHOP and NCP have 
been designed to encourage the development of small, previously difficult- to-
develop infill sites, and to offer opportunities for small developers, local non-
profits, and community development corporations directly or through 
partnerships to build their development capacity. 

B. Conduct collaborative, holistic neighborhood planning to support new 

mixed-income housing creation with supporting infrastructure and services 

Over the course of the next ten years, we will work with communities to identify 
areas across the five boroughs where coordinated planning—including changes to 
land use and zoning, and improvements to infrastructure and services—can 
promote substantial opportunities for new housing that complements and 
enhances neighborhood character. The Department of City Planning’s (DCP)
borough offices will coordinate closely with community organizations, local 
residents, and sister agencies to conduct neighborhood planning initiatives 
around new and existing housing, and plan for additional transit and service 
improvements. DCP will engage communities at the early stages of this process to 
collect and share data on land use, housing, infrastructure, and services, while 
soliciting guidance from local residents and businesses, community organizations, 
and elected officials about their concerns and first-hand experiences to identify 
existing community needs, set priorities, and shape the plans. All land use actions 
initiated as a result of these community planning processes will be subject to a full 
public review process, which will provide additional opportunities for input from 
Community Boards and local elected officials.

C. Establish a Mandatory Inclusionary Housing Program to promote economic 

diversity and affordable-housing development 

The City will establish a new Mandatory Inclusionary Housing Program to create new 
housing affordable to local communities.  The Mandatory Inclusionary Housing 
Program will be applied in conjunction with land use actions that promote 
increased housing capacity in order to create opportunity for economic diversity in 
neighborhoods. The housing created in the Mandatory Inclusionary Housing Program 

70

Housingnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City will serve households at a range of income levels, and will be permanently affordable, 
as part of the City’s effort to preserve communities and neighborhood affordability.

D. Expand opportunities for minority- and women-owned enterprises and 

expand the pool of developers building affordable housing 

The Department of Housing Preservation and Development (HPD) is committed 
to promoting the participation of Minority- and Women-Owned Business 
Enterprises (M/WBE) in the development and management of affordable housing 
subsidized under City-sponsored programs. Through the Building 
Opportunity initiative, HPD seeks to build the capacity of M/WBE through 
professional development, networking, and mentoring programs; improve access 
to capital for M/WBE developers with low-cost financing options for site-
acquisition and predevelopment costs; and enhance the ability of M/WBE 
developers to compete more effectively for HPD support by providing targeted 
new construction and preservation opportunities.

E. Support and expand efforts to preserve affordable units through 

neighborhood planning and outreach 

Effective preservation strategies will vary by neighborhood and should be tailored 
to each planning effort. This will require analyzing data on housing and market 
conditions to identify community needs, developing localized preservation 
strategies, and engaging communities to implement these strategies. For example, 
in a community facing rising rents due to market pressures, the City may be most 
effective in helping owners keep properties affordable by using tax incentives or 
financing tools to incentivize energy retrofits that would reduce utility costs. In a 
community experiencing high rates of physical distress, the City may need to 
focus efforts on expanding its Proactive Preservation Initiative (PPI) through 
HPD evaluations. PPI targets deteriorating properties for increased code 
enforcement, and works with lenders and regulators to encourage owners to 
make necessary repairs in a timely fashion. 

F. Foster large-scale development at potential major-site assemblages 

As the city’s population grows within its geographic limits, the availability of 
developable land will continue to decline. The rising cost of developable land, in 
turn, becomes a driving factor of the affordability challenge facing real estate 
development. There are potential development opportunities throughout the five 
boroughs where surface or subterranean infrastructure—such as rail-yards and 
tracks—can be built upon. At Sunnyside Yards alone, up to 200 acres are potentially 
available for such development. While overbuild development must be evaluated 
for technical feasibility and cost effectiveness, the City’s ability to identify feasible 
opportunities could make hundreds of acres of otherwise unavailable property 
across the five boroughs potential sites for transit-oriented development, improving 
connections to, and quality of life for, surrounding neighborhoods, and promoting 
affordable housing and economic development opportunities. 

71

Jerome Avenue streetscape

The neighborhood 
planning process

A multi-agency effort led 
by the Department of City 
Planning is engaging local 
residents, businesses, and 
institutions in a comprehensive 
planning process of a two-mile 
stretch of Jerome Avenue 
in the Bronx, to identify and 
evaluate opportunities to 
provide and support new and 
existing affordable housing; 
access to jobs and training; 
economic development and 
entrepreneurship; brownfield 
clean-up; cultural amenities; 
pedestrian safety; parks; 
schools and daycare; and retail 
and local services. The study 
and resulting community plan 
will promote coordinated 
investments in infrastructure 
and services to shape a resilient, 
sustainable community, and 
will include land use and 
zoning changes, and the 
application of a Mandatory 
Inclusionary Housing Program 
within the area to promote 
affordable housing. 

Housingnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 2
Support efforts to create new housing and jobs 
throughout the region

The City recognizes that, as part of a regional economy and labor force, addressing 
housing challenges will require collaborative action by partners throughout the 
region if the economy of the whole region is to grow together in the coming years. 
Providing housing and convenient transit options in and around New York City will 
strengthen the region’s future economy, while also increasing locational options for 
the region’s workforce to live. 

Supporting Initiative
A. Collaborate with regional municipalities and housing agencies on  

shared priorities 

DCP will establish a unit that will address regional and long-range planning 
issues. The unit will analyze regional population, economic and land use trends. 
The unit will work with other municipalities and local governments throughout 
the metropolitan region, as well as their local planning departments, to coordinate 
regional planning initiatives. The unit will identify challenges that face the region 
as a whole and help shape regional responses to leverage strengths and address 
challenges of mutual interest.

Initiative 3
Expand housing and related services to support the city’s 
most vulnerable populations 

Our most vulnerable residents need safe housing and supportive housing services. 
We will expand and streamline programs to help individuals and families find 
housing—a critical element of a stable life. Affordable housing is essential to meeting 
the needs of New York City’s homeless population of over 57,000 individuals—
including nearly 1,000 veterans (over half of whom are in shelter)—and the city’s 
growing senior population. Youth who age out of foster care, and formerly 
incarcerated people, too often encounter barriers that prevent them from 
transitioning successfully to independent living. Leveraging Housing New York, the 
City will provide community-based housing resources to these vulnerable 
populations to promote strong, safe neighborhoods and livable communities. 

Supporting Initiatives
A. Strengthen community-based homelessness prevention systems

We will enhance and expand the city’s homeless prevention services through 
community networks and neighborhood organizations, while strengthening 
coordination across government agencies at city, state, and federal levels.

72

Housingnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City B. Create a more streamlined process for intake, assessment, and rehousing to 

end veteran homelessness

The City has committed to the White House’s goal of ending homelessness among 
veterans by 2016. We will create a housing plan for every homeless veteran in the city, 
regardless of discharge status, within two weeks of their entry into the system. We 
will also connect all single adult male veterans entering shelters with a Supportive 
Services for Veteran Families Program provider. We will conduct multi-agency case 
conferences to overcome barriers to housing, and prioritize veterans for housing 
based on each veteran’s preference, housing needs, eligibility, and vulnerability. 

C. Develop affordable housing appropriate to community needs, including 

housing for families, supportive housing, and senior housing

Camba Gardens Apartments in  
Wingate, Brooklyn

This effort will leverage federal and state rental subsidies that help seniors afford 
their rent and will include zoning and regulatory amendments to facilitate the 
development of senior housing units. 

D. Expand rental assistance and aftercare to support individuals transitioning 

from shelters to permanent housing

We will expand the Living in Communities program to provide rental assistance 
and support to over 6,000 households annually, ensuring existing shelter 
populations have stable housing. Additionally, the City will connect homeless 
families to existing permanent subsidized housing through NYCHA and the 
Section 8 Program.

E. Expand housing options for people with disabilities by increasing oversight, 

targeting placement strategies, and accessing housing subsidies

We will help people with disabilities access housing subsidies by improving 
coordination across government agencies and removing barriers to the City’s 
affordable housing resources. The City will expand the role of ADA and Section 
504 coordinators to full-time positions to ensure a more active and coordinated 
response to the housing needs of people with disabilities.

F. Advocate for state and federal funding to increase supportive  

housing production

The City will increase targets for the production of supportive housing and 
advocate for increased funding from programs such as the Medicaid Redesign Team 
and a NY/NY4 agreement with the State. We will continue to focus on the creation 
of supportive housing that focuses on the particular needs of ex-offenders, youth 
aging out of foster care, and people with chronic illness and disabilities.

73

Housingnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Thriving Neighborhoods

Goal: New York City’s neighborhoods will 
continue to thrive and be well-served

Overview
New York City is a city of neighborhoods. When New Yorkers describe where they 
live, they often name their neighborhood. For residents to succeed, neighborhoods 
require basic services, healthy environments, a good quality of life, and connections to 
the city’s job centers. As New York City’s population continues to grow, we will make 
strategic investments to bring necessary public-transit access, quality affordable 
housing, retail, and services to both growing and underserved neighborhoods.

Initiative 1
Support creation of vibrant 
neighborhoods by alleviating 
barriers to mixed-use development 
and utilizing available financing tools 

Neighborhood planning, including zoning changes 
and maximizing available financing tools, can open up 
a wide range of opportunities for mixed-use 
communities, These tools are effective in providing 
space for neighborhood services, including local 
retail, while also encouraging new housing. 

Supporting Initiatives
A. Pursue neighborhood planning strategies that 
expand opportunities for mixed-use development,  
especially the attraction of retail and services to 
underserved neighborhoods 

With input from communities and residents, the City 
will initiate strategies to create mixed-use 
communities that include housing, retail, and other 
commercial uses that together support the vitality of 
neighborhoods. For example, creation of appropriate 
commercial space can encourage location of retailers 
providing access to fresh food and necessary supplies 
for residents, as described further in Vision 2. In 

74

Brooklyn Weekend Walks 

nyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City particular, this will include identification of areas where zoning discourages 
vibrant retail and mixed-use development, including reducing burdensome 
parking requirements and allowing for high-quality retail space on ground floors, 
while preserving the full potential for housing above. Finally, we will develop 
recommended design guidelines for City-sponsored mixed-use development to 
maximize the competitiveness and flexibility of ground-floor space. 

B. Maximize the use of available financing tools that assist the commercial 

components of mixed-use projects to support vibrant mixed-use 
neighborhoods

To support vibrant mixed-use communities and strong commercial corridors that 
provide neighborhood services, the City will use a variety of funding sources to 
finance new retail space in underserved areas. It will also leverage federal programs 
such as New Markets Tax Credits (NMTC) to maximize investments. Furthermore, 
we will conduct commercial needs assessments to assess demographic, economic, 
and physical factors and create customized programs to help small businesses adapt 
to such changes. These efforts promote mixed-use projects that serve neighborhood 
goals, small business, and affordable housing opportunities. 

Sheridan Expressway:  
Transportation for Businesses and Residents
The City will continue to work with the New York State Department of 
Transportation (NYSDOT), local businesses, and the community on the future of 
the Sheridan Expressway. We will pursue implementation of the “modify-combined” 
plan put forward in the City’s 2013 Sheridan Expressway-Hunts Point Land Use 
and Transportation Study. The plan involves reconfiguring the Bruckner-Sheridan 
Interchange, constructing on- and off-ramps at Oak Point to provide direct truck 
access between the Bruckner Expressway and the Hunts Point Industrial Area, 
transforming the at-grade portion of the Sheridan Expressway into a local boulevard 
and implementing targeted safety improvements at area intersections. The plan 
would reduce truck traffic on local streets and decrease overall congestion. This 
will improve pedestrian and bicyclist safety and air quality; enhance truck access 
to the Hunts Point Food Distribution Center; better connect local residents to new 
parks and the South Bronx waterfront; and support development. The immediate 
next step to advance these improvements is for NYSDOT to restart and complete an 
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) on modifications to the Bruckner-Sheridan 
interchange, the Oak Point ramps, and the Sheridan Expressway. 

75

Thriving Neighborhoodsnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 2
Make strategic investments for livable neighborhoods 

The City will seek to align investments in infrastructure and services to support the 
livability of neighborhoods slated for growth. Across the city, there are 
neighborhoods where the hard work of planning and consensus-building for new 
housing development has already been completed and area-wide rezonings and 
large-scale development plans will foster new mixed-income housing and 
supporting uses. However, in some of these areas, the potential for new housing can 
only be fully realized after improvements to infrastructure and regulatory changes 
to allow for new mixed-use development. In these neighborhoods, and others going 
forward, agencies will work with local elected officials, residents, businesses, and 
community organizations to make targeted infrastructure investments to make it 
feasible for thousands of new affordable housing units and accompanying retail, 
services, and community facilities to be built. Examples of these types of 
investments are found in initiatives throughout OneNYC, as noted on the next page. 

76

Thriving Neighborhoodsnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Planning for Vibrant Neighborhoods
The City seeks to overcome disparities in access to economic opportunity, transportation, 
city and community-based resources, parks and public space, and broadband across neighbor-
hoods. The City’s efforts will reflect several critical neighborhood-planning principles, cap-
tured under the Thriving Neighborhoods goal. These principles include supporting vibrant 
mixed-use communities that align public transit, housing, and jobs while offering residents 
access to essential retail and services, especially in currently underserved communities; pro-
actively planning for current and future growth; and engaging New Yorkers in the planning 
process. Reflecting and building on these principles, OneNYC includes a number of neighbor-
hood-focused initiatives and sub-initiatives throughout the plan: 

Vision  Goal

Initiatives/Sub-Initiatives

Workforce 
Development

Housing

Transportation

The City will bring workforce training programs to traditionally overlooked populations and support 
the creation of Transition Coordination Centers in every borough to improve postsecondary 
outcomes for students with disabilities.

The City will conduct collaborative neighborhood planning to identify areas across the five boroughs 
where land-use and zoning changes, and infrastructure and service improvements, can promote 
substantial opportunities for new housing that complements and enhances neighborhood character.

The City will work with the MTA and others to improve existing transit services and invest in a 
major expansion of the transit network in order to better serve neighborhoods and provide reliable 
and convenient transit access to employment. 

Broadband

The City will support expanded access to affordable, reliable, high-speed broadband service for 
residents and businesses by 2025.

Culture

The City will ensure high-quality cultural facilities and programming in all neighborhoods.

Early Childhood

The City will explore enhancing Neighborhood Health Hubs by including dedicated space for 
women's health services 

Integrated 
Government & Social 
Services Delivery

The City will provide all New Yorkers with access to high-quality City and community-based 
resources through the Community Schools expansion, Neighborhood Health Hubs that co-locate 
health and mental health services with social services and City agencies, and digital platforms.

Healthy 
Neighborhoods, 
Active Living

The City will improve access to affordable, healthy food and physical activity opportunities in all 
neighborhoods. 

Healthcare Access

The City will establish health clinics in high-need neighborhoods and co-locate behavioral health 
services with primary care.

Criminal Justice 
Reform

The City will make neighborhoods safer through increased use of technology and data as well as 
neighborhood engagement.

Water Management

The City will offer high-quality water services across the five boroughs and enhance infrastructure 
to support stormwater management.

Parks & Natural 
Resources

The City will support quality parks and public space in low-income, growing, and high-density 
neighborhoods through the Community Parks Initiative and other efforts while pursuing a Parks 
Without Borders strategy to enhance neighborhood access and connectivity to parks.

Coastal Defense

The City will reduce flooding risk in waterfront neighborhoods by strengthening the city’s coastal 
defenses against flooding and sea level rise. 

Neighborhoods

The City will make our neighborhoods safer by strengthening social and economic resiliency and 
enhancing community-based organizations’ capacity to support residents with services and information.

1

2

3

4

77

Thriving Neighborhoodsnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City INDICATORS

 Increase in number of public 
cultural and civic events in 
community districts with the 
highest rates of poverty and 
lowest rates of public cultural 
and civic programming

Culture

Goal: All New Yorkers will have easy access to 
cultural resources and activities

Overview
As one of the main drivers of tourism to New York City, culture is a central pillar of 
economic development. Cultural institutions attract tourists, provide thousands of 
jobs, and contribute to resident well-being and quality of life.

Every year, people come from all over the world to visit our world-class museums 
and attend one of the thousands of theater, music, and dance performances that 
occur annually across the city. According to NYC & Company, the City saw a record-
setting 56.4 million tourists, almost half of whom—27.6 million—came specifically to 
enjoy New York City’s cultural life. Visitor spending in general generated nearly $38 
billion in 2013, supporting nearly 370,000 leisure and hospitality jobs. 

Moreover, our world-class institutions, of all scales and unique local offerings, 
underpin the fabric of our neighborhoods and attract artists and creative individuals 
to the city. This combination of home-grown talent and the newly arrived has 
spurred creation of new galleries, music venues, dance spaces, and theaters. 

Cultural activities and spaces further underpin a high quality of life for residents, 
supporting the city’s ability to retain and attract talent. New York City’s rich cultural 
attractions figure in newcomers’ decisions to move and stay here, and factor among 
the neighborhood amenities that inspire residents to live in certain areas. Access to 
culture is critical to ensuring the well-being of residents, improving social 
connections, lowering stress, improving school effectiveness, raising community 
awareness, and enhancing civic engagement. 

However, the boroughs other than Manhattan, and the low-income areas within 
these boroughs, are home to fewer grantee cultural organizations and facilities that 
drive programming, suggesting missed opportunities in supporting quality of life, 
jobs, and tourism in these areas (see Map). Across New York City, community-based 
cultural organizations and facilities face challenges in providing local cultural 
programming to residents due to limited funding and capacity. Parks, recreational 
centers, and public spaces often serve as convenient sites for neighborhood cultural 
programming, yet have suffered from inadequate investment as well as unclear 
permitting processes.

78

nyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Cultural Resources and Poverty:  
New York City Department of Cultural Affairs Grants and Poverty Rates, 2013—2014

Cultural Program Grantees

Cultural Program Sites

30-60% in Poverty

20-30% in Poverty

15-20% in Poverty

10-15% in Poverty

Less than 10% in Poverty

U.S. Census Bureau, ACS 2009–2013
5-Year Estimates

University of Pennsylvania’s Social Impact of the Arts Project’s prelim-
inary map of NYC Department of Cultural Affairs’ grantee sites against 
rates of poverty in NYC is only a first step in a much larger interrogation 
of the social impact that culture has in NYC’s neighborhoods.

79

nyc.gov/onenycCultureVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City We are committed to addressing these challenges and ensuring the vitality of the 
arts in New York City, as we have been throughout the course of New York City’s 
history, demonstrated by the following recent and ongoing initiatives:

•  Supplying financial support and technical assistance to New York City’s cultural 

community, including 33 City-owned institutions that comprise the Cultural Insti-
tutions Group, and grants to more than 1,100 other cultural non-profit organizations 
through the Cultural Development Fund

•  Commissioning public art through the Percent for Art program, which has com-

missioned more than 300 works of art at public building sites throughout New York 
City since its inception thirty years ago

•  Providing affordable artist workspace through programs like Spaceworks, which 

subleases affordable spaces to artists at below-market rates

Recently-initiated projects to continue this commitment include:

•  Providing 1,500 units of affordable live/work spaces, and 500 below-market work-

spaces, for artists by 2024

•  Collaborating with the University of Pennsylvania’s Social Impact of the Arts 
Project to conduct a study of the impact of cultural engagement on neighbor-
hoods in order to help align policies with target neighborhoods

Initiative 1
Ensure well-used, high-quality cultural facilities and 
programming in all neighborhoods

Supporting Initiatives
A. Provide funding and capacity-building support to local cultural 

organizations to create public art and programming in underserved areas 

The Department of Cultural Affairs (DCLA) will explore strategies to build upon 
the existing Community Arts Development Program (CADP) to develop a capacity-
building program for public art and programming. This includes workshops and 
grant support for community-based cultural organizations that serve 
neighborhoods identified by the City as sites for cross-agency coordination and 
investment, including those home to Community Parks Initiative sites. DCLA will 
build upon the existing CADP, which offers workshops on expanding organizational 
capacity, to include capacity-building around commissioning neighborhood-based 
public art projects. In conjunction with this program, additional funding would 
enable DCLA to initiate a new competitive process for capacity-building grants 
aimed at supporting staff at cultural organizations to interface with other 
neighborhood civic groups. 

80

nyc.gov/onenycCultureVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Casita Maria, Dancing in the Streets

Center for Arts and Education 
(Casita Maria)
Center for Arts & Education (Casita Maria) is a 
venerable settlement house, founded in East Harlem 
in the 1930s, which followed the Latino immigrant 
community to the South Bronx in 1960. Casita Maria 
weathered the economic collapse of the area in the 
1970s, when its neighborhood was devastated by an 
arson epidemic, unemployment, street gangs, and 
drug use. Recognizing that the South Bronx has been 
a hub for the cultural innovation and hybridization 
that has influenced American popular culture for 
decades—Jewish culture in the 1930s, the emergence 
of Latin music as Caribbean immigrants moved in, 
doo-wop in the 50s and 60s, and rap and hip hop in 
the 1980s—Casita decided to move the arts to the cen-
ter of its identity as a social-service organization and 
use the arts to change the way people think about the 
South Bronx. According to Executive Director Sarah 
Calderon, “People from outside the area, but also local 
residents, have internalized its identity of helplessness 
and hopelessness. What this area needs is respect.” 
Casita has chosen the area’s rich cultural legacy as a 
strategy for cultivating that respect, including bring-
ing Dancing in the Streets, a producer of adventurous 
free public performances in unexpected places like 
grain silos, beaches, parks, rooftops, and fire-escapes 
to the middle of the street, into its building as a resi-
dent company. Casita’s building, which is shared with 
a public school, also includes a gallery and theater. 
The two organizations have produced the South 
Bronx Culture Trail, which maps historic cultural 
sites and venues from the first Latin record store to 
the Fort Apache police station. Last fall, they began to 
breathe life into the Trail with tours and live perfor-
mances on the fire escapes, stoops, and sidewalks of 
Hunts Point and Longwood. Dancing in the Streets 
will continue to animate the Trail for at least another 
year with mambo dancers, conga players, stickball 
games, and a salsa concert in a walking and dancing 
celebration of the neighborhood featuring profession-
al and neighborhood residents.

81

nyc.gov/onenycCultureVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City B. Facilitate cultural partnerships, such as artists-in-residence, in public agencies 

Funding for cultural partnerships enables agencies to further their missions, 
promote community engagement, support residencies and project production, and 
encourage public dialogue around social questions and issues City agencies work to 
address. Several City agencies, including the Department for the Aging, Department 
of Probation, and Department of Sanitation, have already engaged in cultural 
partnerships in recent years and attested to the value these partnerships have 
created for their agencies. Other agencies, including the Office of Immigrant Affairs, 
Administration for Children’s Services, and the Economic Development 
Corporation, have also expressed interest in engaging cultural partners.

C. Streamline the permitting process in order to increase access to public 

spaces and facilities for community events

There is widespread demand among New York City residents for use of public 
spaces and facilities for community events. Fragmented permitting processes and 
information across agencies that offer these services, however, make it difficult to 
meet this demand. This will enhance access to public facilities and spaces by 
improving information-sharing and process-coordination across agencies for event 
permitting. DCLA will form a citywide task force dedicated to improving existing 
processes. Creating a unified coordination and communications strategy will make 
it easier for residents to navigate the permitting process and increase awareness of 
the availability of spaces for hosting community events.

D. Increase use of parks and public spaces by expanding cultural, educational, 

and civic engagement programming available to the public 

Many public spaces and parks are underutilized, particularly in low-income 
neighborhoods. This would aim to increase resident use of parks and public 
spaces by providing grant funding to community-based cultural organizations to 
develop dynamic cultural and civic programming in these venues. Such 
programming could include public visual art, live music and dance, and 
information-sharing on community issues. Priority would be placed on cultural 
and civic programming conducted in public spaces such as community parks, 
plazas, and streets, to reach the greatest number of people, facilitate community 
interaction, cultivate pride of place, and promote physical exercise and 
community stewardship. As such, the initiative would seek to build upon and 
coordinate with the publicly-sited programming efforts currently in development 
as part of the Community Parks Initiative. 

82

nyc.gov/onenycCultureVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Soul of Brooklyn 

Museum of Contemporary African 
Diasporan Arts (MoCADA)
Museum of Contemporary African Diasporan 
Arts is a community-based museum located in 
Brooklyn’s Fort Greene area. MoCADA established a 
collaborative of 32 African diaspora arts organizations 
called Soul of Brooklyn that has built partnerships 
with local businesses in central Brooklyn neighbor-
hoods around arts programming as a means of pro-
moting their businesses and the enormous diversity 
of art rooted in the African diaspora. The keystone of 
Soul of Brooklyn is its annual Block Party, a summer 
event that draws some 20,000 people. MoCADA’s 
second project, #SoulofBK, will bring arts program-
ming to public spaces in four public-housing devel-
opments in Brooklyn’s Fort Greene and surrounding 
neighborhoods on a monthly basis. The series began 
in February with a screening of the award-winning 
feature, Middle of Nowhere, a film that explores the 
effects of incarceration on women whose loved ones 
have been sent to prison. The screening, co-sponsored 
by the Ingersoll Homes Tenant Association, was 
attended by a balance of residents and non-residents, 
and was followed by a discussion with CNUS, a “think 
tank of formerly incarcerated professionals…work-
ing for justice.” Upcoming programs include a jazz 
performance, screening of the Harry Belafonte biopic 
Sing Your Song (with Belafonte present), a dance per-
formance with “the street dance king of Brooklyn,” 
and participatory arts projects in the public-housing 
tenant gardens led by MoCADA teaching artists. The 
programming is designed to weave together Mo-
CADA’s commitments to the cultural interests and 
needs of public-housing residents, breaking down the 
boundaries that may isolate them from the surround-
ing neighborhoods them, the museum’s exploration of 
the rich complexity of African-rooted expression, and 
dialogue about the difficult issues facing the large and 
complex black community of Brooklyn.

83

nyc.gov/onenycCultureVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City INDICATORS + TARGETS

 Increase overall rail transit 
capacity into the Manhattan 
Central Business District 
between 8-9 am by 20 
percent, by 2040

 Double the number of 
cyclists, tracked by the 
NYC In-Season Cycling 
Indicator, by 2020

 Increase the share of cargo 
moved within the region via 
rail and water

Transportation

Goal: New York City’s transportation network 
will be reliable, safe, sustainable, and accessible, 
meeting the needs of all New Yorkers and 
supporting the city’s growing economy

Overview
Our transportation network is the lifeblood of the city’s neighborhoods and our 
economy. Every day the city’s public-transit system enables millions of New Yorkers 
to get to work and school, access services and shopping, and enjoy the life of the city.

Throughout its history, New York City’s economic growth has been supported by 
investment in its transit system. Despite the importance of the transit network, the 
first phase of the Second Avenue Subway—scheduled to open in late 2016—will be the 
first major capacity expansion of the system since the late 1930s. Today, a growing 
number of subway lines, such as the 4/5/6, are at capacity during peak periods. Transit 
hubs serving the region, such as Penn Station (Amtrak/NJT/LIRR) and the Port 
Authority Bus Terminal (PABT), are also strained. These capacity issues are not 
limited to Manhattan and traditional Central Business Districts. Growth throughout 
the five boroughs, both to dispersed centers of employment and communities 
experiencing commercial and residential growth, like DUMBO, Williamsburg, and 
Long Island City, is creating new challenges, a telling sign of the need for better 
service and connections to emerging job clusters throughout the city.

Reliable and convenient transit access to employment and other activities remains 
stubbornly out of reach for too many New Yorkers. This problem is particularly 
acute for low- and moderate-income residents in areas poorly served by the subway 
or buses. For seniors and those with disabilities, this can affect their ability to simply 
get groceries, or see family and friends. 

For New Yorkers who are active, biking offers a convenient travel option for work 
and other trips. As biking creates no carbon emissions, it also supports the City’s 
sustainability goals. New York City’s Commuter Cycling Indicator, an indicator 
developed by DOT that makes use of the most robust data availalbe to estimate levels 
of cycling within the central areas of the city over time, has almost quadrupled since 
2000. This growth has been facilitated by a dramatic expansion in the City’s bike 
network to 980 lane miles. However, many neighborhoods outside Manhattan and 
inner Brooklyn and Queens still lack significant bike infrastructure.

New York’s three main airports—JFK, LaGuardia, and Newark Liberty—consistently 
rank as the most delay-prone in the nation. During peak hours, the Federal Aviation 
Administration caps take-offs and landings in an effort to control delays. Adding to 

84

nyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City this challenge, forecasts show demand at these airports increasing from about 117 
million passengers today to 150 million by 2030. 

New York City’s freight system also faces significant challenges. Although New York City’s 
port and rail connections fueled the city’s rise in the 19th and 20th centuries, almost all of 
the nearly 400 million tons of cargo that enters, leaves, or passes through the city every 
year are now transported by truck. This creates a host of challenges, from air quality to 
costs for businesses, to security and resiliency, to quality of life concerns for residents. 

And those trucks put a tremendous amount of wear and tear on the City’s roads, 
which are used by millions of vehicles each day. Our streets, bridges, and highways 
are among the oldest in the country and are in need of near constant repair and 
rehabilitation. A sustained commitment to maintaining our road network is essential 
to supporting the movement of people and good across the five boroughs.

Initiative 1
Support full funding of the MTA capital plan

A modern and reliable regional transit system is essential to New 
York’s future growth and realizing the goals of OneNYC. Thus, the 
City strongly supports the full funding of the Metropolitan 
Transportation Authority’s (MTA) 2015–19 Capital Plan. As the 
city’s transit riders, toll payers, and taxpayers already support the 
much of the MTA’s operations, we will continue to look to every 
level of government to support the modernization and expansion 
of New York’s transit system, which is a key economic driver of 
the downstate New York region. 

The City will also work closely with the MTA to identify 
significant savings and improve operational coordination in areas 
of common interest, such as bus rapid transit, other bus services, 
and Access-a-Ride. Any savings we achieve together can be 
leveraged to create new capital support for the MTA. 

Subway capacity expansion

To support the goals of OneNYC, the City calls for the inclusion of the following 
additional capital projects and initiatives in the MTA capital plan:

•  The development of a strategy to accelerate the installation of Communica-

tions-Based Train Control (CBTC), a technology that allows the MTA to operate 
more frequent service on existing subway lines. CBTC improves safety, expands 
capacity, increases reliability, shortens travel times, and enables the installation 
of count-down clocks. To keep up with growing ridership on our subways, CBTC 
must be more quickly deployed on congested routes 

•  A study to explore the expansion of the subway system south along Utica Avenue in 

Brooklyn, one of the densest areas of the city without direct access to the subway

85

Transportationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City •  Entrance upgrades at a number of subway stations in high-growth areas to relieve crowd-

ing and provide access for the disabled beyond those already included in the MTA plan

•  A transfer connection at the Livonia Ave/Junius St stations between the L and the 

3 lines, which would improve subway options for residents of Canarsie and East 
New York

•  The development of a strategy to upgrade the Long Island Railroad (LIRR) At-

lantic Branch to subway-like service after the completion of East Side Access—in-
cluding adoption of the subway fare—and a timeline for implementation

•  Improvements to the LIRR and Broadway Junction stations and necessary en-

hancements, including streetscaping and pedestrian improvements, to strengthen 
connections in a potential high growth area with transit capacity

Initiative 2
Improve existing transit services

Supporting Initiatives
A. Relieve congestion on major subway corridors. In addition to accelerating the 
installation of CBTC on key subway lines, as detailed in Initiative 1, the City will 
also continue to work with the MTA to move forward on design and construction 
of Second Avenue Subway Phase II, and move forward on the planning and 
design of Phase III. When completed, these phases will extend the line north to 
125th Street and south to Houston Street, dramatically relieving congestion on the 
over-crowded 4/5/6 subway lines.

Select Bus Service

B. Improve and expand bus transit throughout the city 

To improve bus service throughout New York City, we will: 

•  Expand the Select Bus Service (SBS) network to 20 routes citywide by 2017.
The MTA and New York City Department of Transportation (NYCDOT) will signifi-
cantly expand the reach of SBS, bringing faster and more-reliable bus service to tens 
of thousands of daily bus riders. The City and the MTA will initiate service on three 
new SBS routes in 2015 and five new routes in both 2016 and 2017. The next routes to 
launch in 2015 are 86th Street in Manhattan, Utica Avenue in Brooklyn, and Flushing 
to Jamaica via Main Street in Queens. The City has also begun work on a transforma-
tive new bus rapid-transit route on Woodhaven Boulevard which will reduce travel 
times by 25 to 30 percent for more than 30,000 daily bus riders. The SBS program has 
been successful in reducing travel times and increasing ridership.

•  Improve local bus service. NYCDOT will work with the MTA to identify key con-
gestion points along busy local bus routes, and to develop and implement solutions. 
Over the next four years, the City will address eight of these bus hot spots. The City 
will also continue to expand transit signal priority (TSP), a system that improves bus 

86

Transportationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City reliability by giving buses an early green light or extra green time at intersections. 
The City will implement two new TSP corridors per year over the next four years (in 
addition to the nine corridors already being planned, and three already in operation).

•  Increase camera enforcement of bus-lane rules. Bus lanes are an essential tool 
for moving buses through congested city streets and getting bus riders where they 
need to go more quickly. Effective enforcement of bus lanes requires cameras in 
order to keep the lanes free from traffic. The current State legislation authorizing 
enforcement of bus-lane rules with cameras expires this year. Working with our 
elected representatives in Albany, the City will work to expand use of bus-lane 
cameras to keep buses moving and thus provide faster trips for tens of thousands 
of New York City bus riders.

•  Provide real time bus information to more riders. Working with the MTA, the 
City will install 250 real time bus information signs at key SBS and local bus stops 
in 2016 and 2017. These displays will provide better information to bus riders, 
especially those without smartphones. 

C. Leverage the commuter rail system to better serve New York City 

communities. The City will work with the MTA to better leverage the commuter 
rail system to provide improved transit connections within the city. The City will 
continue to support the building of new accessible stations in the Bronx as part of 
the Metro-North to Penn Station project, which will bring commuter rail service 
to Co-Op City and other Bronx communities currently without rapid transit 
access. The City will also work with the MTA on a study of the conversion of the 
Atlantic Branch to a more frequent and affordable shuttle service between 
Atlantic Terminal and Jamaica, which would provide a new transit option to 
residents of Crown Heights, East New York, and Jamaica. Finally, the City will 
advocate for changing commuter-rail-fare policy for intra-city trips, including the 
expansion of City Ticket, which would make the Long Island Rail Road and 
Metro-North an affordable option for travel within the city. 

Initiative 3
Plan for major expansions of the transit network 

Supporting Initiatives
A. Develop a regional transit strategy to address the growing number of 

commuters from west of the Hudson River 

Over a quarter of a million workers commute every day from counties in northern 
New Jersey to Manhattan—and this number is expected to increase over the 
coming decades. The bus and rail infrastructure that handles most of this 
commuter load is already at capacity. The City will work with Amtrak, the MTA, 
New Jersey Transit, and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey 
(PANYNJ) to develop an integrated strategy to address this challenge, including: 

87

Real Time Bus Information

Commuter buses

Transportationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Improving Transit Access to Jobs
The initiatives described within this goal will improve existing transit ser-
vice and provide support for major expansions to the transit network. While 
increasing access to jobs for all New Yorkers, these improvements will 
particularly impact those whose poor access by public transit affects their 
economic outcomes.

  
The neighborhoods highlighted in the above map are those in which me-
dian household income for a family of four is below the citywide average 
of $52,259 and access by public transit to jobs is comparatively poor. Many 
workers in these communities do not have access to a car and rely exclusive-
ly on mass transit to get to work.

To improve access to employment in these priority areas, the City will im-
plement a program of public transit and bike improvements, including new 
Select Bus Service (SBS) routes and expanded ferry service. The City will 
also work with the MTA to improve and expand the transit network. These 
initiatives are described in more detail in Initiatives 1, 2, 3 and 4 of this goal. 

Including existing SBS routes, these projects will improve transit service in 
25 priority communities, contributing to the target of providing 90 percent of 
New Yorkers with access to more than 200,000 jobs by transit in 45 minutes.

Below Average Job Access and Income1,2

Potential Rail Corridors/Stops

Existing SBS Corridors

Planned SBS Corridors

Existing Ferry Network

Proposed Ferry Network/Stops

Potential Subway Expansion

Priority Subway Signal Enhancements

NYCT Subway

1 NYC median income is $52,259 (2013)
2 Weighted average jobs accessible via transit within 45 minutes

5-Year Estimates, Economic Opportunity and  
New York City Neighborhoods
NYU Rudin Center Analysis

35

88

 

Hylan Blvd

File: 159_TransitEquity-Hybrid-150420_v2.ai

Transportationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Utica Ave Subway Extension6

1

7

2

4

F o r d ham Road

Co-Op City 
MNR Station

8

Morris Park 
MNR Station

Parkchester 
MNR Station

9

10

Hunts Point 
MNR Station

11

3

ster Ave
South Bronx East-West 
Connector

b
We

5

125th St - LGA

Corridor

86th St Crosstown 
34th St  1st Ave/2nd Ave
14th St Crosstown
Corridor

B

r

o

n

x

-

L

G

A Connector

N o r t h e r n   B l v d   C o r r i d o r

7 - l

i n e

14

E,F,M,R-lines

F

l

u

s

h

i

n

g

-

J

a

m

a

ic
a C
orrid

or
s

12

13

17

A tl a
20

21

S outhern Bro oklyn 
E ast- W est C orrid or

19

n

s i o

r

e

v

n

e   C o

u

n

e

v

ti c   A

n

18

19

W
o
o
d
h

a

v

e

n

 

B

l

v
d

 

C
o

r

r

i

d
o

r

k l y n Corridor

Bushwick to Downtown B r

o

o

F

l

a

t

b

u

s

h

 

A

v

e

 
C

o

r

r

i

d
o

r

r

o
d

i

r

r

23

22

o
C

 

e
v
A

 

a
c

i

t

U

24

27

25

26

28

30

N
o
s

t

r

a

n
d

 

A
v

e

29

31

ptio n

s   C orrid or  O

15

s

a

e

n

e

e

t   Q u

h

t

u

o

S

S

o

u

t

h

e

a

16

s

t
 

Q

u

e

S

o

u

t

h

e

a

s

t
 

Q

e

u

n

e

e

n

s

 

C

o

r

r

i

d

o

s

 

C

o

r

ridor Option

r

 

O

p

t

i

o

n

32

33

32

34

DRAFT 04/20/2015 06:19 PM 

89

Transportationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Utica Ave Subway ExtensionTransit 
Network 
Expansion 
Projects
This map shows two types 
of projects: 

1. Major transit projects  
already under construc-
tion by the MTA and 
PANYNJ.

2. Major capital projects 
that are essential to the 
future growth of the 
city and are called for in 
OneNYC. 

Major Transit 
Projects Under 
Construction

New York City’s 
Priority Transit 
Projects

1. 2nd Avenue Subway (Phase 1)
  Who: MTA-CC
  What: Tunneling and station work to 

extend Q line service to 96th Street.

2. East Side Access
  Who: MTA-CC
  What: Provide LIRR access to Grand 
Central Terminal via the 63rd Street 
Tunnel, increasing frequency and pro-
viding direct access to East Midtown.

3. Advanced Subway Signals
  Who: MTA-NYCT
  What: Installation of new commu-
nications and signal equipment to 
increase reliability and frequency on 
the 7 line.

4. Moynihan Station Expansion
  Who: Amtrak
  What: Initial design and construction 
to convert the Farley Post Office into 
a new passenger rail station while 
improving Penn Station as a major 
component of the Gateway Project.

5. WTC Transportation Hub
  Who: PANYNJ
  What: Replacing World Trade Center 
PATH station with a new transporta-
tion hub that provides connections to 
subway and ferry services. 

1. 2nd Avenue Subway (Phase 2)
  Who: MTA-CC
  What: Extension of the Second 

Avenue Subway from 96th Street to 
125th Street, with new stations at 
106th, 116th, and 125th Streets.

2. Metro-North Railroad Penn 

Station Access
  Who: MTA-CC
  What: Creation of a new connec-
tion from the Metro-North New 
Haven Line to Penn Station, with 
four new stations in the Bronx.

3. Port Authority Bus Terminal 
  Who: PANYNJ
  What: Design of a new terminal 

and supporting facilities to accom-
modate future bus demand and 
improve the customer experience.

4. Gateway Program
  Who: Amtrak
  What: Construction of two new 

Hudson River rail tunnels and oth-
er improvements to double train 
capacity into Penn Station.

5. Penn Station Terminal 

Redevelopment
  Who: NJT/MTA
  What: Design of a new modern 

train station to replace the existing 
outmoded facility, alleviating 
overcrowding and improving the 
passenger experience.

6. PATH Newark Airport Extension
  Who: PANYNJ
  What: Extension of PATH service 

to Newark Liberty Airport to 
provide a one-seat ride from Lower 
Manhattan.

7. Atlantic Avenue Conversion
  Who: MTA-LIRR
  What: Study of the conversion of 

the commuter rail line between 
Atlantic Terminal and Jamaica 
Station into subway-like passenger 
service.

8. Utica Avenue Subway 

Extension

  Who: MTA-CC
  What: Study of the extension 

of the Eastern Parkway Line to 
provide service on the 3 and 4 lines 
along Utica Avenue in Brooklyn.

9. Advanced Subway Signals
  Who: MTA-NYCT
  What: Installation of CBTC, new 
communications and signal equip-
ment to increase reliability and 
capacity on the E,F,M and R lines.

10. 2nd Avenue Subway (Phase 3)
  Who: MTA-CC
  What: Design of the extension 
of the Second Avenue subway 
south to Houston Street, with new 
stations at 55th, 42nd, 34th, 23rd, 
14th, and Houston Streets.

  Other Subway Enhancements
  Who: MTA-CC
  What: Study of new transfer be-

tween the L and 3 lines at Livonia 
Avenue, improvements at Broad-
way Junction, and acceleration of 
advanced subway signals on other 
key congested subway lines (not 
shown).

Existing Transit Capacity

Increased Capacity with 
Expansion Projects

Central Park West

7th Ave

42nd St

NJT- Amtrak Tunnel

33rd St - Path Tunnel

14th St

Canal St

WTC Path Tunnel

Joralemon Tunnel

MetroNorth Tunnel

Lexington Ave

63rd St. Tunnel

60th St. Tunnel

53rd St. Tunnel

Amtrak Empire Service

Central Park West

Lexington Ave

MetroNorth Tunnel

2nd Ave Subway

63rd St. Tunnel

Existing Amtrak service
not shown

7th Ave

60th St. Tunnel

NJT- Amtrak Tunnel

42nd St

53rd St. Tunnel

Amtrak-LIRR Tunnel

33rd St - Path Tunnel

14th St

Amtrak-LIRR Tunnel

Steinway Tunnel

Steinway Tunnel

14th St Tunnel

Williamsburg Bridge

WTC Path Tunnel

Joralemon Tunnel

C

a

n

al St

14th St Tunnel

Williamsburg Bridge

Rutgers Tunnel

Manhattan Bridge

Cranberry Tunnel

Rutgers Tunnel

Cranberry Tunnel

Clark Tunnel

Montague Tunnel

Manhattan Bridge

*Existing guideline capacity adjusted 
for typical performance based on 
average headways or trips completed.

Clark Tunnel

Montague Tunnel

Overall Available Capacity Used  
At Rush Hour

90% or more utilized

75-90%

50-75%

0-50%

12%

88%

Available 
Capacity

Overall Available Capacity Used 
At Rush Hour

90% or more utilized

75-90%

50-75%

0-50%

Existing 
Passengers

35%

65%

Available 
Capacity

Existing 
Passengers

New York City subway ridership has reached record highs. 
In 2014, the system recorded over 6.1 million trips in a single 
day, the highest daily figure since recording began in 1985. 
Commuter rail tunnels under the Hudson River, which are 
over 100 years old, are also carrying a record number of pas-
sengers. High transit ridership is putting tremendous strain 
on the subway and commuter rail systems. 

The first map shows that subway and commuter rail lines 
are at 88 percent of passenger capacity overall entering the 
Manhattan Central Business Districts during rush hour, with 
many lines (shown in dark red) at over 90 percent capacity. In 
some cases lines are operating at over 100 percent, with trains 
tightly packed and passengers often waiting for several trains 
to pass before being able to board. 

The second map shows estimated capacity with the set of 
major expansion projects described in Initiative 3, including 
Amtrak’s Gateway Project, current and future phases of Sec-
ond Avenue Subway, acceleration of advanced subway signal 
system improvements to expand the capacity of existing lines, 
as well as the East Side Access project currently underway. 
With completion of these projects, lines would be at 65 per-
cent passenger capacity overall entering Manhattan during 
rush hour, allowing over half a million more passengers to 
reach places of work in the Central Business Districts during 
the average work day. Many lines would achieve significant 
improvements to their capacity as shown by the number of 
dark green lines on the map.

•  The Gateway Project, an initiative to build two new 
commuter rail tunnels under the Hudson River and 
dramatically expand rail capacity into Penn Station 

•  Long- and short-term interventions to improve access, 
connectivity, amenities, and circulation in Penn Station

•  Modernization of the Port Authority Bus Terminal 

and other bus facilities. The City will also work 
with the PANYNJ to develop a cost-efficient strate-
gy to modernize the PABT

B. Study new subway routes in underserved 

communities and other improvements to the 
subway network 

The City will work with the MTA to study a Utica 
Avenue extension from the Eastern Parkway Line 
(3/4 train). The Utica Avenue corridor is a prime 
candidate for the next generation of subway 
expansion—it is one of the densest areas in the city 
not directly served by the subway and is served by 
the second busiest bus route in the City, the B46. 
The City will also work with the MTA to explore 
creating new system transfers, such as a transfer 
between the L and 3 trains at Livonia Avenue. 
These new connections will reduce travel times 
and expand travel options for thousands of subway 
riders. Finally, the City will work with the MTA to 
identify strategies to improve and expand station 
entrances at subway stops experiencing growing 
ridership. As subway ridership continues to climb, 
we must take action to reduce over-crowding 
within subway stations, especially at choke points 
like stairways and fare-gate areas.

C.  Expand the ferry network

The City will launch an expanded citywide ferry 
network to improve transit connections between 
the city’s waterfront communities; this service will 
be fully accessible to New Yorkers with disabilities. 
Three new routes—Rockaway, South Brooklyn, and 
Astoria—are scheduled to launch in 2017, with two 
others in 2018 (Lower East Side and Soundview). 
The City has also committed capital funding for the 
construction of landings.

92

Citywide Ferry System

 

BRONX 

Soundview 

SOUNDVIEW 

E 90th 

E 62nd 

 

Roosevelt  
Island South 

Astoria 

ASTORIA 

Long Island  
City North 

Hunters Pt South 

Greenpoint 

MANHATTAN 

E 34th 

Stuyvesant Cove 

LOWER 
EAST SIDE 

Grand 

Wall St/Pier 11 

Whitehall 

EAST RIVER 
FERRY  
(EXISTING) 

North Williamsburg 

South Williamsburg 

Governors 
Island 

BBP Pier 1-DUMBO 

BBP Pier 6 - Atlantic 

Red Hook 

QUEENS 

Legend 

Existing 
            East River Ferry   
            Staten Island Ferry  
 
Planned 2017 
            Rockaway 
            South Brooklyn 
            Astoria 
 
Planned 2018 
            Soundview 
            Lower East Side 
 

St George 

STATEN 
ISLAND 

BROOKLYN 

Brooklyn Army 
Terminal 

SOUTH BROOKLYN 

Bay Ridge 

Rockaway 

ROCKAWAY 

Geography is modi(cid:31)ed to show service more clearly. 
Some landings shown do not yet exist or need upgrades to become operational. 

New York City Ferry Service

Transportationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City D. Expand and improve service to and within Staten Island 

Improving connections to Staten Island will support recent revitalization along 
the North Shore and strengthen the connection of the South Shore to the rest of 
the city, an essential link in expanding economic opportunity and building 
resiliency for those communities. The City will work to expand service through: 

•  Enhancements to east/west transportation along the North Shore. In the short term, 

this includes a package of bus service improvements, including additional Transit 
Signal corridors, real time information signs, and treatments for bus hot spots

•  More frequent service on the Staten Island Railway (SIR). New train cars will im-
prove service for existing ridership, while enhanced off-peak service will benefit 
residents of Staten Island as well as visitors to Staten Island’s neighborhoods and 
new attractions and amenities

Initiative 4
Expand the City’s bike network

Supporting Initiatives
A. Continue to expand the City’s bike-lane network, especially to neighborhoods 

with limited bike infrastructure

Bicycling as a way to get around the five boroughs continues to grow in popularity. 
Between 2013 and 2014, the City’s In-Season Cycling Indicator—a measure of bike 
volumes on major bike routes into the Manhattan CBD—rose by 4 percent. 
Overall, cycling has increased a staggering 337 percent since 2000. To support this 
growth and the City’s goal of doubling the Cycling Indicator by 2020, the City will 
continue to invest in new bike infrastructure. Over the next four years, the City 
will add another 200 miles of bike lanes, including 20 miles of protected lanes, 
bringing the total to 1,180 lane miles. The City will work collaboratively with 
communities to continue expanding the bike network outward from the 
Manhattan core and inner Brooklyn. The City will also explore ways to better 
measure bike ridership in areas outside of the Manhattan CBD. 

B. Improve bike access on bridges

Safe and convenient bridge access for bikes is crucial to making New York City 
more bike-friendly. In 2015 and 2016, the City will improve bike connections 
between Brooklyn and Queens with the construction of a two-way bike path on 
the Pulaski Bridge and the installation of protected bike lanes on the John Jay 
Byrne Bridge on Greenpoint Avenue. The City will also improve bike connections 
to the High Bridge in Upper Manhattan to coincide with its reopening this 
summer. Moving forward, DOT is evaluating potential designs for improved bike 
routes on the Grand Street Bridge in Brooklyn and the Honeywell Street Bridge in 

93

Expanded Bike Lane Network

Transportationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Queens. The City is also initiating a study of bike access to the 15 Harlem River 
bridges, which will recommend a program of both short- and long-term 
improvements. Finally, the City is working with the MTA to pilot external bike 
racks on buses that cross bike-inaccessible bridges and to explore options for 
adding pedestrian and bike paths on the Verrazano Narrows Bridge.

C. Expand bike share

In 2015, the City and its partner, New York City Bike Share, will expand Citi Bike 
to Long Island City in Queens, and to additional parts of Williamsburg, 
Greenpoint, and Bedford Stuyvesant in Brooklyn. This expansion will include 
1,000 new bikes and over 90 stations. In 2016 and 2017, Citi Bike will add another 
5,000 bicycles and increase its service areas to additional areas of upper 
Manhattan, central Brooklyn, and western Queens. 

Initiative 5
Expand the accessibility of the city’s transportation 
network to seniors and people with disabilities

Supporting Initiatives
A. Increase accessibility of the pedestrian network to people with disabilities

The City will identify a range of measures to increase the accessibility of our 
streets to New Yorkers with disabilities. These measures include the expansion of 
Accessible Pedestrian Signals (APS) and sidewalk-repair programs, development 
of accessible design guidelines for all New York City street projects, and a pilot 
program to explore ways technology can improve accessibility. New technology, 
such as smartphones, opens up opportunities to assist pedestrians with 
disabilities, particularly the vision-impaired, in navigating the city’s streets—in 
addition to other efforts like DOT’s upgrading of pedestrian ramps.

B. Improve accessibility to bus services for transit users with disabilities

Buses are a critical transportation link for older residents and New Yorkers with 
disabilities. In 2015, the City will roll out a second phase of its Safe Routes to 
Transit initiative to address accessibility problems at 25 bus stops located under 
elevated train lines. At these bus stops, buses cannot pull to the curb, leading 
passengers to wait and then board from the street. This initiative will build 
sidewalk extensions on boarding islands at these stops so that passengers are safe 
and the bus ramps can be properly deployed. 

C. Improve convenience and reliability of modes of transit for New Yorkers 

with disabilities

94

NYCHA, Citi Bike 
and DOT
New York City Housing 
Authority (NYCHA) is part 
of a collaboration with Citi 
Bike and NYCDOT to place 
bike share stations at public 
housing complexes. NYCHA 
residents receive a discount-
ed rate on the annual fee 
charged by Citi Bike. Having 
bike share stations locat-
ed nearby provides more 
mobility options for NYCHA 
residents and the local com-
munity. There are currently 
43 Citi Bike stations serving 
NYCHA developments, 
with 11 more planned for the 
summer of 2015.

Transportationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Red Hook Container Terminal Operations

Working with the MTA, the City will expand use of the yellow and green taxis—
including the growing number of wheelchair-accessible taxis—to provide faster and 
more convenient paratransit services to New Yorkers with disabilities. The City and 
the MTA will work to increase the proportion of paratransit trips made by yellow and 
green taxis over the next four years. And to improve the quality of life for the taxi 
drivers providing these services, the City will create new relief stands and rest areas in 
all five boroughs. The City will also explore the feasibility of installing public toilets 
and benches at some stands.

Initiative 6
The City will make the trucking sector greener and more 
efficient, and continue to expand freight movement via 
rail and water where possible 

Supporting Initiatives
A. Encourage water and rail freight to the New York region through projects such 

as the Cross-Harbor Rail Tunnel and Brooklyn Marine Terminals

The City will continue to protect and invest in deep-water marine terminals in 
Brooklyn and Staten Island. The City has already invested $100 million in upgrades and 
a rail link to the South Brooklyn Marine Terminal (SBMT), a long underutilized facility. 
In the immediate term, SBMT will focus on non-containerized cargos primarily used in 
the construction industry and roll-on/roll-off cargos such as automobiles. In the longer 
term, and in conjunction with the Cross-Harbor Rail Tunnel, additional facility 
upgrades at SBMT and improved distribution facilities East of Hudson, could allow the 
SBMT to handle container ships, which carry most of the world’s ocean freight.  By 
directly serving New York at a point that is already in the market, truck trips will be 
reduced and air quality improved. The City will also support state and federal efforts to 
dredge primary and secondary waterways in order to better facilitate waterborne 
freight movement and water-dependent uses along the waterfront. 

To realize the inherent environmental and cost advantages of using rail, the City will 
continue to work with PANYNJ to advance the Cross-Harbor Rail Tunnel connecting 
New Jersey and Brooklyn. Specifically, the City supports a two-track, double-stack 
rail freight tunnel as this configuration offers the largest capacity and greatest 
redundancy.  When completed, this tunnel will result in a meaningful shift in the 
City’s dependence on truck service for freight. PANYNJ estimates that construction 
of the tunnel would reduce annual greenhouse gas emissions by 80,000 to 110,000 
metric tons by 2035. Such a tunnel would also greatly expand East of Hudson freight-
rail capacity, and support domestic rail needs as well as container activity at SBMT.  
In the meantime, the City will support the PANYNJ’s efforts to enhance the capacity 

95

Transportationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Off-hour truck delivery

of freight movements by rail barge across the Hudson River, increasing opportunities 
now for shippers in Brooklyn, Queens and beyond.

B. Reduce the impact of the trucks that must bring freight “the last mile” to market

The City will increase off-hour deliveries by food- and retail-sector trucks, with a 
focus on large buildings, high-pedestrian areas, and bicycle-conflict areas such as 
Midtown and Lower Manhattan, Downtown Brooklyn, and Downtown Jamaica. By 
shifting deliveries to over-night and early-morning hours, the City will decrease 
both congestion and truck emissions. As part of this effort, we will work with the 
trucking industry to explore and pilot low-noise truck technologies.

Mobile applications are now available to match suppliers who need to move goods 
with truckers who are already on the road and have room to pick up additional 
cargo, thus reducing new truck trips on our streets by consolidating loads. The 
City will launch a pilot project to encourage the use of these platforms.

The City will work with large fleets to create a Smart Fleet rating system, similar 
to the Leadership in Energy & Environmental Design (LEED) standard for 
buildings, but based on truck safety, noise reduction, energy efficiency, and 
emissions-control technology. The City will then publicly recognize fleets that go 
above and beyond in using safe, quiet, and green trucks for their deliveries. 

To facilitate the delivery of construction-related cargo by water, such as building 
components, turbines, and generators, the City will create designated roll-on/roll-off 
and lift-on/lift-off staging areas for maritime cargo in each borough, making it easier 
and cheaper to bring these essential construction supplies into New York City. 

C. Expand JFK Airport’s air freight activity

The City is working with PANYNJ to improve JFK’s air-freight facilities. Over the 
past decade, cargo volumes at JFK have declined by almost a third. Today, over 
15,000 people at JFK work directly in air cargo related jobs. Regionally, the air 
cargo industry supports over 50,000 jobs, $8.6 billion in sales, and almost $3 
billion in wages. The City remains committed to supporting the air cargo industry 
and will work with PANYNJ to increase the capacity of our air freight systems to 
expand JFK’s share of the air-freight market. 

In March 2015, the City adopted a new rule allowing industry-standard 53-foot 
tractor trailers to access JFK. The City is also working with the PANYNJ to build 
new facilities. Over the past two years, a truck stop has opened on-airport, and a 
new animal handling facility (for which the City provided financing) is under 
construction. The next two years will see the construction of a new state-of-the-
art cargo handling facility. 

This work is complemented by the City’s efforts to establish an industrial business 
improvement district in the adjacent Springfield Gardens neighborhood. 

96

Transportationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Baggage claim at LaGuardia Airport

Initiative 7
Expand airport capacity

To maintain our competitiveness as a center of tourism and the global economy, the 
City will work with PANYNJ, New York State, and the Federal Government to 
expand flight capacity and improve airport facilities and terminals at the region’s 
airports, particularly LaGuardia and JFK. Working with PANYNJ and the airline 
industry, the City will support the expansion of Terminal One, Terminal Eight, and 
Terminal Four at JFK and the complete reconstruction of the Central Terminal at 
LaGuardia Airport, an outdated facility that is long overdue for replacement. 
Additionally, the City will encourage the Federal Aviation Administration and 
PANYNJ to continue to implement NextGen technology, a series of upgrades to the 
region’s air traffic control system that will improve safety and enable more-efficient 
take-offs and landings. 

The City supports expanding flight capacity at JFK, but only in a manner that is 
sensitive to the environment and the quality-of-life concerns of adjacent 
communities. The City will work with PANYNJ as it completes a study of capacity-
expansion options, including the addition of a fourth runway. This study should 
take into account the noise, air quality, and greenhouse gas emission impacts of 
different expansion options and ways to mitigate these impacts. 

Initiative 8
Provide reliable, convenient transit access to all three of 
the region’s major airports

Though they are all served by transit, none of New York’s major airports offers a 
one-seat transit connection to the City’s Central Business Districts (CBDs). This lack 
of access impacts air travelers and airport employees, and increases congestion on 
the regional highway system.

The City will continue to work with the MTA and others to improve existing bus 
connections to LaGuardia in the short term, while working with PANYNJ, the MTA, 
and the State of New York to develop a plan for better long-term transit. Similarly, it 
will continue to support PANYNJ’s project to extend Port Authority Trans-Hudson 
(PATH) to Newark Airport, which will add airport access from Lower Manhattan. 
Finally, the City will work with PANYNJ and the MTA to explore additional ways to 
improve existing bus and rail connections to JFK, such as adding more frequent 
shuttle service on the Atlantic Branch of the Long Island Rail Road after East Side 
Access is complete. 

97

Transportationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 9
Improve the city’s roads, bridges,  
and highways

The City is responsible for the operation and 
maintenance of a complex network of roads, bridges, and 
highways that connect the five boroughs. Much of this 
infrastructure is aging—the four East River Bridges, for 
example, are all over 100 years old—and requires 
continual reinvestment to remain in a state of good repair. 
Over the next ten years, the City will undertake dozens of 
major capital projects to restore our network of roads and 
bridges, including significant rehabilitation of major 
roads essential to the City’s economic vitality.  For 
example, sections of the critical FDR Drive will be 
rehabilitated along with the esplanade that sits above it.

In Brooklyn, the City will rehabilitate and reconstruct the 
21 interconnected bridge structures that carry the 
Brooklyn Queens Expressway from Atlantic Avenue to 
Sands Street, including the “triple cantilever” stacked 
section of highway completed in 1948, topped by the 
iconic Brooklyn Heights Promenade. With no 
reconstruction work in recent history, the triple 
cantilever is in need of major repair with many 
components experiencing significant deterioration.  In 
Queens, the City will repair multiple structures carrying 
and crossing both the Van Wyck Expressway and the 
Cross Island Parkway. In addition, the City is initiating a 
series of robust safety improvements along sections of 
Queens Boulevard, a Vision Zero Priority Corridor, as 
part of the Administration’s Great Streets initiative. In the 
Bronx, the Great Streets initiative will implement safety 
and quality of life improvements for users along the 
Grand Concourse, a major thoroughfare in the borough, 
while the City will also undertake the rehabilitation and 
reconstruction of highway structures along the Bruckner 
Expressway and the Hutchinson River Parkway.

In Staten Island, the City will undertake 17 projects to 
fully rebuild city streets, including sections of Father 
Capodanno Boulevard, Victory Boulevard, and Arthur 
Kill Road. Together, these projects will ensure our road 
and bridge network can continue to safely support the 
movement of people and goods across the city.

Department of Transportation Street, Bridge, 
and Highway Reconstruction Program 

Highway Structure Rehabilitation/Reconstruction

Bridge Rehabilitation/Reconstruction

Great Streets Reconstruction

Major Streets Reconstruction

NYC Major Roads 

Less than $100 million 

$100-500 million

More than $500 million

The “Triple Cantilever” in 1948 and today

98

Transportationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City FDR DrBrooklyn-Queens ExpyBruckner ExpyBelt Pkwy4th AveAtlantic AveQueens BlvdGrand ConcourseCross Island PkwyVan Wyck Henry Hudson Sheridan Hutchinson River PkwyExpyPkwyExpyAdditional Major Streets Resurfacing  
and Reconstruction

 

Bronx (8)

Queens (12)

Brooklyn (21)

Staten Island (17)

Manhattan (17)

Citywide (18)

Note: Number represents the number of projects

Source: NYCDOT, Division of Finance, Contracting, and Program Management
Note: Highway Structure Rehabilitation/Reconstruction occurs at multiple points 
along each highway

99

Transportationnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City FDR DrBrooklyn-Queens ExpyBruckner ExpyBelt Pkwy4th AveAtlantic AveQueens BlvdGrand ConcourseCross Island PkwyVan Wyck Henry Hudson Sheridan Hutchinson River PkwyExpyPkwyExpyInfrastructure Planning & Management

Goal: New York City’s infrastructure and built 
environment will exemplify global economic, 
environmental, and social leadership

Overview
Infrastructure is the foundation of our regional economy and provides for the 
everyday needs of all New Yorkers, yet much of New York’s core infrastructure is 
aging and outdated. Many systems, including transit, sewers, and schools, were built 
decades ago and are at capacity, straining to meet the demands of a growing 
population and a modern, thriving economy. Fixing our infrastructure requires 
significantly more funding and a renewed national commitment to cities, as well as 
smarter, more efficient infrastructure planning and project delivery. 

The physical legacy of disinvestment during the fiscal crisis of the 1970s stands as a 
testament to the urgency of achieving a “state of good repair.” The City spent the 
next three decades trying to catch up, investing billions of dollars to rehabilitate 
infrastructure and buildings. We need a near-term infusion of funding from all levels 
of government in order to prevent history from repeating itself and to allow us the 
opportunity to expand infrastructure systems that catalyze economic expansion and 
neighborhood revitalization. 

While more investment is required, we will take significant steps to improve our use 
of existing funds through integrated capital planning, improved project delivery, and 
asset management. Current investment plans would benefit from better 
coordination with our regional partners, including State government, public 
authorities, utilities, and other private entities. The City is committed to taking a 
leadership role in coordinating these investments and incorporating them into our 
own strategic planning process.

As it currently stands, many capital projects come in over budget and behind 
schedule. This is partially due to reasons outside of our control, such as the 
complexities of construction in a dense city. However, we can do better in a 
number of areas, including reforming City and State laws, streamlining rules for 
public procurement and construction, streamlining permitting processes, 
improving capital project tracking and accountability, and enhancing the City’s 
technology and data systems. 

Our overall goal is to ensure New York City’s infrastructure is the product of best 
practices and is consistent with our City’s reputation as a global leader in economic, 
environmental, and social policy. In this vein, we are fully committed to reforming 
the processes that support each stage of the infrastructure lifecycle.

100

nyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Additionally, the City’s massive infrastructure program creates a wide range of jobs 
and economic activity. We will leverage these investments to create employment and 
career opportunities for New Yorkers, targeted to those who have historically 
experienced high rates of unemployment. These commitments are carried out 
through targeted training programs and Project Labor Agreements, discussed earlier 
in the Workforce Development goal. 

School Construction Authority 
A growing city needs more room for children to learn 
in facilities that meet their educational needs. To ad-
dress increasing demand in high growth areas across 
New York City, the City will add over 30,000 new class-
room seats during this plan, as well as investing in new 
technology and the improvement of aging facilities.   

The School Construction Authority’s (SCA) current 
inventory of facilities includes over 190 buildings that 
are at least 100 years old. The needs for improvements 
in these schools identified by the SCA are based on 
several factors, including the annual Building Condi-
tion Assessment Survey of all schools, which provides 
an evaluation of the condition of building systems.  
The SCA uses this evaluation of what is required to 
maintain a state of good repair—in conjunction with 
recommendations from facility personnel, school 
administration, and the community—to develop the 
projects to be included in its Capital Plan.

In its upcoming Capital Plan, the SCA will create 
thousands of seats in areas of current overcrowding 
and projected enrollment growth, and will take signif-
icant steps to address the pre-kindergarten need.

101

Infrastructure Planning & Managementnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 1
Secure funding sources that are equitable, sustainable, 
and dedicated to our core infrastructure

Over the next decade, the City will continue to advocate for a robust federal 
commitment to funding urban infrastructure, while exploring new streams of 
dedicated revenues. 

Supporting Initiative
A. Leverage land-use actions to encourage infrastructure investments 

City policy, such as rezonings, create economic value for property owners, some 
of which should be recaptured in order to fund the infrastructure improvements 
needed to accommodate growth and development. For instance, as part of the 
zoning changes associated with the planned One Vanderbilt office tower, the 
development firm SL Green Realty Corporation has committed to spend $210 
million on improvements to the Grand Central Terminal and subway station. 
Investments in infrastructure can in return enhance real estate values and thus 
lead to increased tax revenue for the City.

Initiative 2
Maximize the economic, environmental, and social 
benefits of infrastructure investments

Every City agency strives to achieve economic, environmental, and social benefits 
with its investments—the triple bottom line. New methodologies have emerged to 
help inform investment decisions. The City should maintain a focus on achieving a 
state of good repair for its infrastructure assets while prioritizing projects that are 
socially, fiscally, and environmentally advantageous, as exemplified by the emissions 
reductions, energy cost savings, and jobs created through retrofits to public 
buildings under One City: Built to Last. 

The City already collects a wealth of data that could be harnessed to inform 
infrastructure investment decisions based on triple bottom line criteria. Over the 
next year, we will review current indicators and identify data gaps that would 
support more sophisticated prioritization methodologies. 

We will also facilitate interagency and intergovernmental collaborations in order to 
realize higher economic, environmental, and social returns (the triple bottom line). 
These efforts will include improvements to the City’s geographic information 
systems (GIS) and data-sharing platforms that will also increase the transparency of 
our infrastructure programs and facilitate greater partnerships with our 
infrastructure partners in state and federal government. 

102

Infrastructure Planning & Managementnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 3
Enhance capital project delivery

Capital projects often take too long and cost too much. While many of the reasons 
for this are outside of the City’s control, there is much we can change to improve the 
situation, particularly in rules and processes. Over the next several months, the City 
will establish a task force to identify strategies for accelerating investment programs 
and modernizing project delivery, procurement, and payment processes to greatly 
reduce the time between project approvals and completion.

Supporting Initiatives
A. Reform state laws to enable design-build 

City construction is governed by state laws, some of which are outdated and 
undermine timely capital project delivery. In 2014, we were pleased to see the 
joint bidding law passed in Albany, which increases the pace and lowers the cost 
of upgrading our underground infrastructure--what EB White described as the 
“ganglia” of subterranean power lines, steam pipes, gas mains, and sewer pipes.

The City also supports an amendment to the New York State Construction Law 
authorizing the use of the design-build method of project delivery. Currently, the 
City is required to contract separately and sequentially for design and 
construction services. Design-build saves a great deal of time by requiring the 
procurement of only one contract for both phases and allowing these phases to 
overlap. New York State is using a design-build contract for the Tappan Zee 
Bridge rebuild, which may save taxpayers as much as $1 billion. New York City 
agencies should be able to use similar cost-saving measures for their projects. 

B. Expand the Accelerated Work Program

Last spring, the City created the Underground Infrastructure Taskforce to 
improve the response protocol for gas leaks and find ways to advance the 
replacement of older gas pipes and water mains. In cooperation with private 
utilities, the City piloted the Accelerated Work Program in 2014, which identified 
locations where water- and gas-main work could be coordinated. The City will 
continue to expand the program in 2015. The Department of Environmental 
Protection will spend $100 million to replace old water mains on an accelerated 
schedule. Thanks to the Accelerated Work Program, private utilities will be 
replacing their gas pipes at many of the same locations using the same contracts. 
As a result these streets will be dug up only once.

C. Improve project scoping and design to improve green-building and save costs

Spending more time and effort on the early phases of any project pays great 
dividends during the design and construction phases. However, due to funding 
structures for capital projects, the scoping of a project is often short changed. 

103

Infrastructure Planning & Managementnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Several years ago the City created a program to fund early and enhanced project 
scoping. This program has proven to be successful and will be expanded to build 
on the progress already made. 

We will take a more integrated approach to planning and design in general, and 
bring more of a design focus to capital planning and budgeting. Moreover, we will 
make a conscious effort to focus on citywide goals and values during each public-
project design phase. Led by the Department of Design and Construction, the City 
will plan, design, and construct the City’s infrastructure and public buildings to 
integrate green building and energy-efficient goals in a cost-effective manner. 

D. Modernize project delivery requirements and project management processes

The City is investigating additional ways to reduce construction costs and shorten 
project schedules. As a whole, the City’s project delivery requirements must be 
modernized to meet national and global project management lifecycle standards. 
Developing citywide project management knowledge and frameworks to address 
scoping, design, procurement, construction, payments, change orders, and 
permitting will reduce project costs, schedules, and risks. We will create a higher 
level of transparency and accountability for capital projects, and revamp the 
online Capital Projects Dashboard for internal tracking and public information. 
The Mayor’s Office of Contract Services is also reviewing every step of the City 
procurement process for opportunities to reduce delivery time and reduce costs.

Department of Design and Construction
As the City’s primary design and construction agency with close to $9 billion in capital projects, DDC 
is a leader in shaping New York City’s built environment in ways that enhance the delivery of public 
services and support the City’s economic growth, sustainability, and resiliency. The Department’s 
public buildings portfolio includes new libraries, police precincts, and firehouses; and DDC’s infra-
structure portfolio provides safer, smoother roadways; reliable water service; and greener streets.

DDC will collaborate with government and community stakeholders to use the design and con-
struction processes so that City capital assets—both infrastructure and public buildings—support 
OneNYC goals in the following ways:

•  Continue design and construction excellence that meet the highest standards of public design 

while being sensitive to neighborhood context

•  Increase the sustainability of the City’s capital assets by minimizing their impact on the environ-

ment and contributing to the City’s goal of dramatically reducing greenhouse gas emissions

•  Maximize the City capital assets’ resilience to withstand future extreme environmental and 

human threats

•  Foster positive health outcomes for residents and workers who use our facilities through Healthy 

Design features

•  Design for equitable service integration when projects are completed and operations begin, with 

flexible features to optimize the delivery of services as conditions change

104

Rendering of Kew Gardens Hills 
Library, designed by WorkAC

Infrastructure Planning & Managementnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 105

Infrastructure Planning & Managementnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Major Planned City Projects  
2014-2025
The City will soon release its Ten-Year Capital Strat-
egy, providing a blueprint for capital spending over 
the next decade that will be critical to improving New 
Yorkers’ lives in the years to come. A selection of major 
planned projects, including transportation, parks, 
water, sewers, hospitals, and schools, economic devel-
opment and resiliency projects are highlighted on the 
map at right. OneNYC and the Ten-Year Capital Strat-
egy are aligned to ensure funding for OneNYC goals.

Hostos Community College Expansion
City College Upgrades
North River WWTP Cogeneration Upgrades
Henry Hudson Parkway Bridges
Reconstruction/Rehabilitation

Metropolitan Hospital Recovery and Resiliency
Coler Hospital Recovery and Resiliency
FDR Drive Bridges Reconstruction/Rehabilitation

Bellevue Hospital Facility - Various Projects,
Bellevue Hospital Facility Recovery and Resiliency
P.S./I.S. 342 Manhattan (Riverside Center) Construction
Beacon High School Construction

High Line Phase 2 Construction of Section 3

The Clinton School Construction

Gansevoort Marine Transfer Station Construction
Brooklyn Bridge Rehabilitation
The Peck Slip School Construction

Lower Manhattan Comprehensive Coastal Protection
Red Hook Integrated Flood Protection System

Less than $100 million

$100-500 million

More than $500 million

CUNY

DOC

DSNY

EDC

HHC

DEP

DOT

DPR

NYCHA

SCA

Note: Partial list of City-led projects

Projects Not Shown

Citywide Green Infrastructure Program

NYCHA Recovery and Resiliency Investments

Citywide Parks Initiative

Parks without Borders

Water Siphons Replacement
for Channel Deepening

Stapleton Phases 2 and 3
Affordable Housing Development

College of Staten Island
Expansion and Upgrade

Mid-Island Bluebelt
Stormwater Improvements

P.S. 62 Staten Island
Construction

106

Infrastructure Planning & Managementnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Bronx Community College Upgrades
Grand Concourse Reconstruction (Phases 3 and 4)
Lehman College Expansion

Projects located in 
Upstate New York

Delaware Aqueduct Repair

Kensico Eastview Connection
Tunnel Resiliency

Ashokan Dam Upgrades

Catskill Aqueduct Rehabilitation

Filtration Avoidance Determination

Gilboa Dam Resiliency
Cannonsville Hydroelectric
Facility Construction

P.S. 106 Bronx Addition

Bronx Districts 9,10,11 Garage Replacement
Bronx Highways and Parkways 
Bridges Reconstruction/Rehabilitation

Hunts Point Lifelines
Hunts Point Modernization
Hunts Point WWTP Digester Replacement

Wards Island WWTP Upgrades

Willet’s Point Highway Access Improvements

Major Queens Highways and Parkways
Bridges Reconstruction/Rehabilitation

Queens College Upgrades

P.S. 315 Queens Construction
Queens Boulevard Reconstruction 
I.S. 311 Queens Construction

Southeast Queens Sewer Build-out

York College Expansion

Atlantic Avenue Pedestrian Safety
Upgrades (Phases 1 and 2)

Beach Channel Drive Bulkhead Repair
Rockaway Boardwalk Reconstruction

Hunter’s Point South Phase 2
Affordable Housing Development

Manhattan Districts 6,6a,8
Garage Replacement

Williamsburg Bridge Reconstruction/Rehabilitation
East Side Coastal Resiliency

BQE Triple Cantilever Reconstruction/Rehabilitation

Medgar Evers College Expansion
Brooklyn College Expansion

P.S./I.S. 338 Brooklyn Construction
P.S./I.S. 437 Brooklyn Construction

4th Avenue Safety
Improvements (Phases 1 and 2) 

Breezy Point Double Dunes

Belt Parkway Bridges Reconstruction/Rehabilitation

Coney Island Hospital Facility
Recovery and Resiliency

Coney Island Sewer Upgrades
Coney Island West
Affordable Housing Development

107

Infrastructure Planning & Managementnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City INDICATORS + TARGETS

  Increase the percentage of 
New Yorkers with afford-
able, reliable, high-speed 
Internet service at home

  Increase the percentage of 
New Yorkers with access 
to free public Wi-Fi within 
1/8th mile from home

  Substantially increase 
access to fast, affordable, 
reliable connections of 1 
gbps (gigabits per second) 
or higher

Broadband

Goal: Every resident and business will have access 
to affordable, reliable, high-speed broadband 
service everywhere by 2025

Overview 
High-speed Internet access is not a luxury, but an essential service that New Yorkers 
depend on to communicate, make a living, and access essential goods and services. 
Without broadband, families and businesses are unable to fully participate in many 
aspects of contemporary life. Lack of broadband negatively affects the civic, 
economic, and social engagement of community residents; makes it difficult for 
startups and small businesses to succeed and scale; and impedes neighborhood 
development, job creation, and the economic health of the city. Twenty-two percent 
of New York City households do not have Internet service at home, with major 
disparities in households above and below the poverty line. 36 percent of households 
below the poverty line do not have Internet access at home, compared to 18 percent 
of households living above the poverty line. 

Commercial high-speed connections are often priced out of reach of small 
businesses and startups. The average cost of monthly gigabit speeds for 
commercial users is $8,000 in New York City, outpacing those in peer cities like 
Chicago, and far outstripping costs in cities that have made recent investments in 
broadband infrastructure. 

Sluggish Internet speeds and capacity can also create barriers to local economic 
development and weaken New York City’s global competitiveness. Despite recent 
investments by Verizon to build a citywide fiber-optic network, many New Yorkers 
cannot access or afford this high-speed service. And while businesses located in 
Manhattan’s commercial corridors generally enjoy high-speed connections, there 
are insufficient options in the neighborhoods in other boroughs where growth in key 
sectors is taking place. Large healthcare and research centers are also finding 
Internet speed and access to be a barrier to their operations and growth. This poses 
a risk that critical New York City economic sectors might lose competitive ground to 
national and international cities. 

The City has, to date, taken significant steps toward building its capacity to meet this 
goal, creating new positions focused on telecommunications infrastructure and 
policy, and establishing the Broadband Task Force, an advisory body composed of 
experts in broadband technology, real estate development, venture capital and 
digital equity. 

108

nyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 1
Promote competition in the residential and commercial 
broadband markets

The City will create new or expanded franchises and alternative service models to 
expand infrastructure, produce more competition, and increase affordability by 
2025—in addition to holding incumbent providers accountable for their legal 
obligations and negotiating for additional upgrades when those franchises come up 
for renewal in 2020.

According to the Federal Communications Commission, broadband providers 
appear to invest more heavily in network upgrades and offer faster Internet speeds 
in areas where they face competition. The City will therefore seek to increase the 
diversity of residential and commercial broadband service options through new 
technologies, combined with novel approaches to the exercise of existing franchise 
authority, establishment of new franchise authority, creative investment of City 
resources, and/or creative uses of regulatory authority. The City will explore 
avenues for increasing competition, including maximizing non-exclusive franchises, 
supporting hyper-local residential and commercial networks, and facilitating the 
transition of companies that have, to date, solely focused on infrastructure to 
Internet service providers.

Initiative 2
Provide high-speed, residential internet service for low-
income communities currently without service

The City will invest in networks providing high-speed residential access either free 
or at low-cost for low-income communities. Investments may be targeted at 
particular locations such as communities identified for economic and housing 
development, or may be focused on particular types of housing, such as public or 
subsidized properties. Sites may also serve as nodes in a citywide network consisting 
of LinkNYC and other wireless corridors and networks.

The City expects to realize cost savings resulting from greater efficiencies, such as 
the use of smart building technologies and resident utilization of e-services. The 
City will also develop revenue models—grounded in advertising, branding 
opportunities, premium paid service, and other strategies that will ensure networks 
are ultimately self-sustaining. 

109

Broadbandnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 3
Increase investment in broadband corridors to reach 
high-growth business districts, with a focus on outer-
borough neighborhoods

The City will invest in new technologies to support innovation economy business in 
key commercial corridors. This will address the relative lack of high-speed fiber or 
wireless options for businesses in the boroughs outside of Manhattan, high prices 
and their combined impact on economic growth and development across the City. 
Selection criteria will include demonstrated need for and potential benefit from 
robust broadband by businesses in considered areas, and/or demonstrated 
engagement from community-based organizations and other stakeholders to help 
drive the adoption and implementation process.

WiFi coverage within 1/8th of a mile of  
New Yorkers’ homes

Example of WiFi coverage in Downtown Brooklyn, DoITT

Initiative 4
Promote seamless user experience 
across public networks to create 
high speed access across the 
boroughs

The City will ensure a successful citywide rollout of 
LinkNYC network, which will consist of up to 10,000 
structures across the five boroughs, offering 24/7 free 
Internet access up to gigabit speeds, as well as a range 
of other services. 

The City will leverage existing public and commercial 
wireless networks and corridors and the backbone 
created by LinkNYC, with a goal of covering a critical 
mass of the City’s public spaces with free Wi-Fi by 
2025. Today, there are 1,050 documented public 
hotspots across the five boroughs; the City will enable 
a dramatic increase in this number.

Through these initiatives, the City will support a 
seamless user experience across all five boroughs, 
leveraging LinkNYC and other wireless hotspots. As a 
result of rising usage levels, the potential advertising-
based revenue models—similar  to the LinkNYC 
model—is sure to grow, which will promote the 
sustainability of these networks over time. 

All networks in public spaces can be woven together 
to ensure a seamless user experience that can be 

110

Broadbandnyc.gov/onenycVision 1 One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City accessed by residents and users across all five boroughs. To ensure all networks meet 
the benchmarks set by LinkNYC, the City will standardize the speed, security, 
interoperability, and price features across networks, and manage the technical 
integration between these networks.

Initiative 5
Explore innovative ways to provide high-speed Internet 
to homes, businesses, and the public

The City has released a Call for Innovations targeting the needs of underserved 
residential and commercial customers, identifying public and private infrastructure 
that might be leveraged to meet these needs, and requesting suggestions for 
innovative models to provide service to low-income households and startups. These 
policy and project proposals will inform City efforts to increase access, affordability, 
and adoption. 

Finally, the City will conduct research on the latest broadband developments and 
trends to help inform the City’s strategy on connectivity.

LinkNYC structure

111

Broadbandnyc.gov/onenycVision 1   One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Vision 2

Our Just and 
Equitable City 

New York City will have an inclusive, equitable 
economy that offers well-paying jobs and 
opportunities for all New Yorkers to live with 
dignity and security

New York City will…

  Lift 800,000 New Yorkers out of poverty or 

near poverty by 2025

  Reduce overall premature mortality by  

25 percent by 2040 and dramatically 
decrease racial and ethnic disparities

  Increase median household income

112

Vision 2nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Goals

Early Childhood
Every child in New York City will be nurtured, will be protected, and will thrive

Integrated Government & Social Services
All New Yorkers will have access to high-quality, conveniently located, community-
based City resources that promote civic engagement and enable them to thrive

Healthy Neighborhoods, Active Living
New Yorkers of all ages will live, work, learn, and play in neighborhoods that 
promote an active and healthy lifestyle

Healthcare Access
All New Yorkers will have access to the physical and mental healthcare services that   
they need

Criminal Justice Reform
Among large U.S. cities, New York will continue to be the safest and will have the  
lowest rate of incarceration, with a criminal justice system that leads the nation in 
fairness and efficiency

Vision Zero
New Yorkers will continue to embrace Vision Zero and accept no traffic fatalities on  
New York City streets

113

Vision 2nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Vision 2

Nearly half of New York City 
residents live in or near poverty

Near Poverty

23.6%
15.8%
5.7%

 Poverty

Near poverty defined as below 150 percent poverty threshold; 
poverty defined as $31,156 threshold for a family of four;  
extreme poverty defined as below 50 percent poverty threshold

Extreme Poverty

45.1%

The CEO Poverty Measure, 2013
nyc.gov/onenyc

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 

 Total

We will lift 800,000 New 
Yorkers out of poverty or 
near poverty by 2025

This can be achieved through a broad set of anti-poverty initiatives including raising the 
minimum wage—a particularly effective tool for reducing poverty and income inequality.

Scheduled and proposed minimum wage  
increases and anti-poverty initiatives will help us reach 
more than half of our goal
•  Minimum wage is already scheduled to increase to $9 per hour in January 2016 

(phased in from 2013 to 2016)

•  Governor Cuomo has proposed raising the minimum wage to $11.50 per hour

•  Early impact of anti-poverty initiatives (detailed below)

We will fight to raise the minimum wage to more than 
$13 per hour in 2016, indexed to inflation so it rises to 
$15 in 2019

We will not wait. OneNYC anti-poverty initiatives will 
continue to move us toward our goal while we push to 
secure the right starting wage for New York City
•  Pre-K for All to provide early education and help parents re-enter the workforce

•  Educational programs to prepare students for college and career success

•  Workforce development programs to build skills and find New Yorkers  

quality jobs

•  Better transportation to increase accessibility to work

•  Healthy environments and access to quality healthcare to help New Yorkers  

stay in the workforce

•  Affordable housing to reduce living costs for a range of households

•  IDNYC—already issued to more than 100,000 New Yorkers—to access  

government and community services

•  Accessible broadband  to enable full participation in the city’s civic and  

economic life

Soccer game at Brooklyn  
Bridge Park

Introduction

To truly achieve our aspirations, New York City must be 
a place where all can participate and contribute. 
Regardless of background or circumstance, all 
residents must be able to fully engage in the 
economic, civic, and social life of the region.

Equity is imbued in all the visions of OneNYC. Vision 1 of 
this plan, for example, lays out a strategy for an inclusive 
workforce that ensures all New Yorkers have the skills 
they need to access well-paying jobs; Vision 3 aims to 
improve greenhouse gas emissions, air quality, flood-
control, and parks across all the boroughs; and Vision 4 
sets out a plan for all of our neighborhoods to be ready to 
withstand and emerge stronger from the impacts of 
climate change and other 21st century threats.

Equity must inform all of our planning, policymaking, and governing. Through 
this lens we assess who will benefit, who is burdened or needs help, and whether the 
actions we undertake broaden the participation of underrepresented groups, reduce 
disparities, and expand opportunities for all New Yorkers. Where someone starts 
out in life should not determine where they end up. Equal opportunity and the 
genuine possibility of upward mobility are our nation’s signature ideals, and New 
York City has long been a place where these ideals can be achieved. Remarkable 
stories of extraordinary individuals who beat the odds and achieved their dreams 
provide inspiration to new generations of people seeking a better life for themselves 
and their families.

But we know there is a gap between our ideals and the real-world experiences of many 
New Yorkers. Too often, a person’s home address, parents’ income, race, or other 
demographic traits can weigh on his or her life outcomes—from educational 
attainment to future earnings, and even life expectancy. We must change these 
underlying odds.

A commitment to reduce poverty
In 2013, 45.1 percent, or 3.7 million, of our residents were living below 150 percent 
of the CEO poverty line, meaning they were in poverty or near poverty.

The economic insecurity of people living in or near poverty plays an outsized role in 
undermining individual potential, and compounds other challenges. The hungry 
student has difficulty focusing in the classroom; poor living conditions produce 
health challenges; and financial stresses can lead to depression, which in turn can 
affect the wellbeing of a family’s children. What might appear to be an issue specific 
to education, health, safety, or another concern is often rooted in something more 
basic: not having enough money.

116

Vision 2nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City A higher minimum wage would be a powerful force in reducing poverty. In his 
2015 State of the City address, the Mayor stated the City’s goal to raise the 
minimum wage to more than $13 per hour in 2016, and to index it so that it is 
expected to rise to $15 per hour by 2019. If this were to happen, and OneNYC 
anti-poverty initiatives are implemented, 800,000 New Yorkers would be lifted 
out of poverty or near poverty by 2025. The change would be transformative.

Ensuring all New Yorkers live a long and healthy life
We are committed to ensuring every New Yorker has the opportunity to live 
a long and healthy life. Premature mortality—death before the age of 65—is closely 
tied to poverty and a lack of access to critical services. There are significantly more 
premature deaths among certain racial/ethnic groups and in certain neighborhoods. 
In 2013, the age-adjusted premature mortality rate per 100,000 deaths was 276.1 for 
black Non-Hispanic New Yorkers, 188.2 for white Non-Hispanic New Yorkers, 160.3 
for Hispanic New Yorkers, and 98.5 for Asian New Yorkers.

As a City, we are committing to reduce the premature mortality rate by 25 
percent by 2040, so as to dramatically decrease disparities among racial/ethnic 
groups. OneNYC targets causes of premature death such as infant mortality, 
chronic diseases, gun violence, and traffic fatalities. We will promote the 
health, safety, and wellbeing of all of our residents.

Premature death by neighborhood
Rate per 100,000

75.6 - 137.8

137.9 - 171.7

171.8 - 226.5

226.6 - 367.1

Unpopulated areas

Center for Economic 
Opportunity (CEO) 
Poverty Measure

The CEO poverty rate is an  
alternative, more comprehensive 
poverty metric than the official,  
federal poverty rate. It measures  
the cost of living in New York City 
and the resources available to  
households after tax and social  
policy are taken into account.  
CEO has developed a variety of  
models that estimate the effects  
of taxation, nutritional and  
housing assistance, work-related 
expenses, and medical out-of-pocket  
expenditures on total family  
resources and poverty status.  
The most recent data available is  
from 2013. 

1. The poverty threshold for a  
family of four in 2013 was 
$31,156. The threshold to  
move out of near poverty, 150 
percent of the threshold, was 
$46,734 for a family of this size

2. The most recent CEO poverty 
rate for New York City is 21.5 
percent, and the near poverty  
rate is 45.1 percent

3. As of 2013, the poverty and  

near poverty rate has remained 
essentially unchanged since 2011

Concurrent with the publication 
of this plan, CEO is releasing 
its annual poverty report, this 
year covering the period of 2005 
through 2013.

See www.nyc.gov/ceo.

DOHMH, Bureau of Vital Statistics

117

Vision 2nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Vision 2
Vision 2

Equity benefits us all
The city benefits from everyone’s contributions. We all gain when a child discovers a 
passion for dance watching his first neighborhood performance; when a middle-
schooler can post to GitHub from her home because of broadband access; when a 
high school student receives guidance to apply for financial aid and realizes he can 
afford college after all; and when a parent goes to her job confident her toddler is 
safe in affordable childcare. City investments can make all of these things 
possible—and the future artistic works, entrepreneurial ventures, and productive 
workforce these investments create enrich our city and drive it forward.

New York City’s economic and cultural leadership over time won’t last if we do not 
make progress toward greater equity. Research is beginning to show that inequality 
can stymie economic growth. It can also undermine the social cohesion necessary to 
create resilient communities. We will all bear the consequences of inequality as our 
budgetary and social costs rise in areas such as healthcare and criminal justice. It is 
in our shared long-term interest to have a just city.

All New Yorkers deserve a chance to reach their potential, and over the next two 
decades, we will work as a city to ensure access to these opportunities. New York 
City will persist in its historic legacy as a city for everyone.

Taking action now
While the fight for a higher minimum wage goes on, New York City will not rest.  
Dozens of initiatives across all four visions in OneNYC are aimed specifically at 
reducing inequality and promoting opportunity. This plan describes the actions the 
City will take even as the effort to enact a fair minimum wage continues, and 
ultimately succeeds.

nyc.gov/onenyc

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 

118

Neighborhood Spotlight

In the Bronx River Corridor, investments into pedestrian safety, com-
munity resources, and access to fresh and healthy food will provide 
residents with the resources needed to fulfill their potential.

Hunts Point Down to Earth 
Farmers Market and The 
Point/Corbin Hill Farm Share 
Pop up fresh food markets will 
increase residents’ access to fresh 
and healthy foods

Vision Zero Priority Corridors 
and Intersection 
Safety improvements at Hunts 
Point and Bruckner Boulevards 
will increase pedestrian and 
bike safety

A

B

C

A

B

C

SOUNDVIEWPARKCROTONAPARKBRONXPARK652SHERIDAN EXPYCROSS-BRONX EXPYBRUCKNER EXPYBRONX RIVER PKWY180TH STTREMONT AVEHUNTS POINT BLVDBRUCKNER BLVDBRONXRIVERHOUSESCROTONAPARK EASTHUNTS POINTLONGWOODPARKCHESTERWESTFARMSVision 2

INDICATORS + TARGETS

 Reduce infant mortality rate 
by 20 percent to achieve 
a historic low of 3.7 infant 
deaths per 1,000 live births 
citywide by 2040, and 
dramatically decrease the 
racial/ethnic disparity

 All four-year-olds receive 
access to free, full-day, 
high-quality pre-kindergar-
ten

Infant mortality rate 
by race/ethnicity
Per 1,000 live births, 2013

Black 
Non-Hispanic

8.3

Puerto  
Rican

Other 
Hispanic

4.8

4.3

Asian / Pacific 
Islander

3.1

White 
Non-Hispanic

3.0

DOHMH, Bureau of Vital Statistics

Early Childhood

Goal: Every child in New York City will be 
nurtured, will be protected, and will thrive

Overview
The City is determined to close the opportunity gap that exists for young New 
Yorkers, starting from the birth of every child. The infant mortality rate (IMR)—an 
indicator of the entire population’s health and wellbeing—was the lowest in New 
York City history in 2013, at 4.6 deaths per 1,000 live births. However, despite a 
declining rate that is nearly 25 percent below the U.S. average, there are significant, 
and in some cases widening, disparities between neighborhoods. According to NYC 
Vital Statistics data, in 2013 infant mortality rates were nearly double in areas with 
very high poverty compared to areas with low poverty (5.2 infant deaths per 1,000 
live births vs. 2.8, respectively).

Among racial ethnic groups, the disparity is the starkest between black and white 
babies. The 2013 infant mortality rate for black babies, 8.3 infant deaths per 1,000 
live births, was the infant mortality rate for white babies more than 20 years ago. 
Among Hispanics, the 2013 infant mortality rate for Puerto Rican babies, 4.8 deaths 
per 1,000 live births, was over 1.5 times the rate for white babies, and was the infant 
mortality rate for white babies nearly a decade ago. Other Hispanic babies had an 
infant mortality rate of 4.3 deaths per 1,000 live births, a little under 1.5 times higher 
than the rate among white babies in 2013.

To address infant mortality disparities, the City proposes achieving a historic low of 
3.7 infant deaths per 1,000 live births citywide by 2040 and dramatically decreasing 
the racial/ethnic disparity. The City will reach its commitment by targeting key 
neighborhoods with high infant mortality rates and implementing social and 
structural supports before, during, and after pregnancy.

High-quality early childcare and early childhood education lead to improved 
academic and life outcomes. High-quality pre-kindergarten promotes cognitive and 
academic gains that persist into adulthood, reduces involvement with the criminal 
justice system, increases high school graduation rates, and increases college 
attendance rates. When a child attends pre-kindergarten, his or her chances of 
reaching advanced reading levels by the third grade—a critical indicator of future 
success—increases by 18 percent. Studies have found that students who are 
proficient readers by third grade are more likely to graduate high school and enter 
college. However, not all families have the chance to provide pre-k for their four-
year-olds. In New York City, such strides have been made. Pre-K for All, launched in 
January 2014, has helped bridge this gap for families with four-year-olds.

nyc.gov/onenyc

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 

120

Vision 2

Early Childhood

Initiative 1
Nurture and protect all infants so they thrive during 
their first year of life and beyond

Disparities in the infant mortality rate arise from inequities including, but not 
limited to, adverse working and living conditions, inadequate healthcare, 
socioeconomic position, and discrimination. Thus, the City proposes a series of 
projects that address these root causes of poor pregnancy outcomes and promote 
safety in the first year of life in order to reduce the number of infant deaths.

Supporting Initiatives
A. Create neighborhood spaces dedicated to advancing women’s health

The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DOHMH) will explore 
enhancing its Neighborhood Health Hubs (described further in goal on Integrated 
Government & Social Services) with designated space for women’s health 

Infant mortality rate by mother’s racial/ethnic group and education
Per 1,000 live births, 2013

12

10

8

6

4

2

10.2

7.8

7.2

5.3

5.1

3.5

4.3

3.6

2.0

3.2

3.3

3.0

Less than high school graduate

High school graduate

More than high school

6.4

4.4

3.9

4.6

4.3

3.5

Citywide

Non-Hispanic 

Black

Non-Hispanic 

White

Asian & Pacific 

Islander

Puerto Rican

Other Hispanic

DOHMH, Bureau of Vital Statistics

nyc.gov/onenyc

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 

121

l o S e. Sleep ap

a

r

t
.

Sta Y   C

Your baby sleeps safest alone  

on her back in a crib or bassinet free of toys,  

blankets and pillows.

EvEry yEar about 50 babiEs in nyC diE from a slEEp-rElatEd injury.

To learn more, call 311 or visit nyc.gov  
and search “infant safety” 

Bill de Blasio
Mayor

Bill de Blasio
Alcalde
Mary T. Bassett, MD, MPH 
Comisionada

Bill de Blasio
Department of 
Mayor
Health & Mental 
Mary T. Bassett, MD, MPH 
Hygiene
Commissioner
Mary T. Bassett, MD, MPH
Commissioner

Administration  
for Children’s  
Services
Gladys Carrión, Esq. 
Commissioner

Bill de Blasio
Mayor
Mary T. Bassett, MD, MPH 
Commissioner

Safe Sleep 
Campaign
 
Approximately 80 percent of 
all infant deaths due to injury 
are related to the infant’s 
sleep position and environ-
ment. The City has launched 
the Safe Sleep Campaign to 
make parents and other care-
givers aware of the potentially 
fatal risks of sharing a bed 
with an infant, and how to 
prevent injuries and deaths 
associated with other unsafe 
sleep practices, such as exces-
sive bedding, bumpers, and 
toys in cribs. City hospitals 
and community health centers 
are leading these efforts.

promotion. Located in seven low-income, underserved areas, these hubs would 
provide access to comprehensive women’s health and baby-friendly care, which 
would help address infant mortality. Possible features include space for 
supportive group work (e.g., parenting support and coaching, smoking cessation), 
and exercise studios and equipment. In addition, the space would support healthy 
birth outcomes by reducing stress and providing a physical space for women to 
breastfeed, rest, exercise, and connect with each other. These structural supports 
are often missing in communities with poor birth outcomes and high infant 
mortality rates.

City programming in these spaces would also provide women with information 
and resources they need to stay healthy before, during, and after pregnancy, and 
offer them the support their young infants need. Some of the DOHMH’s key 
initiatives to support infants and healthy mothers include breastfeeding and safe 
sleep education, cribs for families that cannot afford them, home visitation during 
pregnancy and early childhood, and promotion of women’s health, including 
increasing access to contraception to help plan pregnancies.

B. Expand the number of “baby-friendly” hospitals to promote access to 

breastmilk for newborns

The Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative (BFHI) is a global program sponsored by 
the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF) to encourage and recognize hospitals and birthing centers that offer an 
optimal level of care for lactation based on the WHO/UNICEF Ten Steps to 
Successful Breastfeeding for Hospitals.

Breastfeeding has been shown to have many health benefits for infants, including 
reducing the risk of ear infections, diarrhea, and pneumonia. Moreover, it helps 
reduce infant mortality because it helps increase the likelihood of survival for 
premature infants. Research shows that infants born at facilities that provide 
recommended care for lactating mothers and babies, such as those that have 
incorporated the WHO/UNICEF Ten Steps to Successful Breastfeeding, are more 
likely to initiate breastfeeding, exclusively breastfeed, and continue to do so for 
longer periods of time.

Of the 40 maternity facilities in New York City, 17 hospitals and one birthing center 
are participating in the New York City Breastfeeding Hospital Collaborative, an 
initiative to increase exclusive breastfeeding rates. Of these 18 participating 
facilities, three are Baby-Friendly Designated, and seven are in the final phase of 
designation. Under this initiative, the City will pursue and encourage physical 
interventions in hospitals that will transform newborn nurseries into smaller 
observational areas, assuring adequate space for newborns to safely sleep in the 
same room with their mothers; establish space for breastfeeding education and 
support, including a private place to breastfeed for mothers whose infants are in the 
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit; and establish a central place to store infant formula 
for mothers who are not exclusively breastfeeding.

122

Source Name 

Early Childhoodnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 2
Offer free, full-day, high-quality 
pre-kindergarten for every four-
year-old to ensure all New York 
children have the opportunity to 
enter elementary school with a solid 
foundation for future success

Pre-K for All is New York City’s truly universal full-day 
pre-kindergarten system. As of December 2013, fewer 
than 27 percent of four-year-olds in the city had access 
to full-day pre-kindergarten. Launching Pre-K for All 
in January 2014, the City committed to ensuring all 
four-year-olds whose families are interested in full-day 
pre-k could participate in a high-quality program by 
the 2015-2016 school year.

In September 2014, the City opened 245 new full-day 
sites in all five boroughs. Recognizing the critical role 
teachers play in early childhood education, the City 
committed to recruiting high-quality pre-k teachers 
with early childhood certification, as well as 
supporting several hundred teachers in earning their 
certification through a partnership with City 
University of New York (CUNY). It also trained more 
than 6,000 lead teachers, assistants, and 
paraprofessionals. Programs are expected to support 
all children in gaining the foundation needed to realize 
their potential. These programs focus on curriculum, 
instruction, and family engagement on the skills and 
knowledge reflected in the comprehensive state pre-k 
learning standards, known as the New York State 
Prekindergarten Foundation for the Common Core.

In conjunction with its commitment to offer a high-
quality, full-day pre-k seat to every four-year-old, the 
City will continue to focus on developing high-quality 
early childhood programs through teacher recruitment 
and training as well as through increased support for 
students whose native language is not English, students 
with disabilities, and students from high-need areas.

The Center for Economic Opportunity and the 
Department of Education are collaborating with Westat, 

123

Children at a New York City public school

Playground at PS 347 - The American Sign Language and English  
Lower School

Full-day pre-kindergarten 
enrollment
Number of four-year-olds

53,230

+173%

19,500

2013-2014

2014-2015

DOE

Early Childhoodnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City “I am a social worker and 
my husband is a postal 
worker…We do not 
qualify for affordable 
childcare, so between 
childcare, afterschool, 
rent, and clothes, we 
barely have money for 
food. I visit the local 
pantry at my church to 
get help with food. Our 
school-age children 
attend public school, but 
I pay $1,800 a year for 
afterschool for one child, 
$3,000 a summer for day 
camp, $30,000 in rent, 
and $18,200 on daycare 
for my two-year-old.”

—Sanaya B., Manhattan

Metis Associates, and Branch Associates, with supplemental support from the New York 
University Institute for Human Development and Social Change, to undertake a 
rigorous two-part research study of this work. It will include an evaluation of the 
effectiveness of the implementation process and an impact study assessing the 
kindergarten readiness of children in pre-k. The research is designed to inform future 
years of program delivery as well as lay a foundation for future longer-term research.

Given the research that demonstrates how critical early childhood learning is, the 
City will explore the possibility of expanding pre-kindergarten to three-year-olds. 
Like Pre-K for All for four-year-olds, this program would help close the opportunity 
gap among New York City students and will enable new parents to re-enter the 
workforce earlier.

Initiative 3
Develop a comprehensive plan for high-quality early 
childcare

Childcare is a major expense for working families in New York City. Studies show 
that providing increased access to high-quality childcare—and lowering the cost of 
childcare—can significantly increase mothers’ employment rates and incomes. It can 
also help businesses retain employees and, in turn, provide job stability. However, in 
2014, New York was the least affordable state in the nation for childcare, with the 
average price of center-based, infant childcare about 15 percent of the median 
annual state income for married couples, and 54 percent for single mothers.

A 2011 Center for Urban Future (CUF) report found that only one in four low-income 
children under the age of six was being served by center-based childcare programs 
across the five boroughs. In addition, waiting lists for childcare centers in some parts 
of the city were long, with as many as 40,000 parents in line for childcare services. 
Several city neighborhoods, most notably the South Bronx, northern Manhattan, and 
parts of Central Brooklyn, were underserved in subsidized and affordable childcare.

Currently, the Administration for Children’s Services (ACS) runs the Early Learn 
initiative, which provides center-based and family-based early care and education to 
more than 29,000 children from six weeks through four years of age. Early Learn is a 
model for early care and education that brings together Head Start, childcare, and 
pre-k services, and provides quality early learning opportunities at 350 centers in 
the highest need areas.

As part of an effort to expand early-care and education programs, ACS is conducting 
a large-scale community needs assessment to better understand the changing needs 
of New York City communities. The City will use the findings to develop a plan to 
close the gap in access to childcare. In drawing up the plan, the City will consider 
subsidies, property and zoning concerns, and economic development initiatives to 
increase the availability of group childcare in underserved communities.

124

Early Childhoodnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City TALK
TO YOUR BABY

THEIR  
BRAIN  
DEPENDS  
ON IT

ANYTIME. ANYWHERE.

#TalkToYourBaby

Talking, reading and singing build your baby’s brain.

FOR TALKING TIPS 
search nyc.gov/TalkToYourBaby, or text “Talk” to 877877

Message and data rates may apply. Reply “STOP” to opt-out. 

Bill de Blasio 
Mayor
Mary T. Bassett, MD, MPH 
Commissioner

in partnership with the NYC Children’s Cabinet

Talk to Your Baby Campaign
 
On April 1, 2015, the City launched Talk to Your Baby, which is a campaign to encourage early 
childhood language development and establish strong bonds between parents and children. 
The campaign promotes talking, reading, and singing to babies to help build their brain.  
Children of low-income parents typically hear 30 million fewer words by the time they reach 
age four. This “word gap” persists over time, having a negative impact on their language devel-
opment, school readiness, and academic achievement later in life. By providing parents with 
free books and other information and resources, we are providing them with simple tools to 
improve the lives of their children. Just like we encouraged thousands of new parents to sign 
up for pre-kindergarten, we can get thousands of parents to start talking, reading, and singing 
to their babies. These efforts are led by the Children’s Cabinet, the Mayor’s multi-agency 
initiative intended to increase communication and coordination among City agencies and 
develop strategies for a holistic approach to child safety and wellbeing.

125

Early Childhoodnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Vision 2

Integrated Government & Social 
Services

Goal: All New Yorkers will have access to high-
quality, conveniently located, community-based 
City resources that promote civic engagement 
and enable residents to thrive

Overview
New York City is home to a world-class government and non-profit programs that 
provide social services, civic engagement opportunities, and resources for improving 
residents’ lives. Participation in these services and civic engagement opportunities, 
however, is often inhibited by a variety of barriers, including inaccessible or 
inconvenient locations, lack of information, timing constraints, immobility, lack of 
language options, and lack of broadband access. In addition, in many cases, people 
need help identifying their needs and which services can best help them.

We are working to give New Yorkers the right services at the right times in a 
coordinated and integrated manner through both physical and digital approaches. 
This involves meeting people where they are in their communities—their schools, 
health providers, libraries—and providing them with a “one-stop shop” that 
addresses their service and information needs. In addition, we need to invest in a 
data platform that helps us identify the services that New Yorkers need most.

The City is looking to build on existing successes and work toward establishing 
physical hubs, which will provide a cohesive range of social and community services. 
Hubs allow access to City government and community information, and civic 
engagement opportunities specific to those neighborhoods. We will use existing 
government-owned and non-profit-owned real estate to the greatest extent possible 
and build on local initiatives.

With the expansion of the Department of Education’s (DOE) Community Schools 
and the launch of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s (DOHMH) 
Neighborhood Health Hubs, we have already begun to break down service silos.

nyc.gov/onenyc

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 

126

Vision 2

Integrated Social & Government Services

Initiative 1
Transform schools into Community Schools

Community Schools are an effective model for engaging communities, 
delivering services, and improving student performance. The City is 
laying the groundwork for expanding the Community Schools initiative, 
which began transforming 128 schools in 2014, with the goal of 
eventually making every school a Community School.

Students face a number of challenges in the classroom and at home that 
impede their ability to succeed academically. The Community Schools 
model identifies student needs and connects students with services to 
address these needs. The Community Schools’ “whole child, whole 
community” approach recognizes that, by intervening in this way, 
schools can help every student achieve his or her full potential.

At Community Schools, students receive high-quality academic 
instruction, families access social services, and communities are invited to 
share resources and address their common challenges. Community 
Schools establish strong partnerships among principals, parents, teachers, 
and community-based organizations (CBOs). These partnerships offer a 
coordinated approach to increasing learning opportunities, student 
wellness, readiness to learn, personalized instruction, community 
partnerships, and family engagement. At each Community School, the 
services provided—such as extended days, school-wide vision and dental 
screening, and mental health services—are tailored to the specific needs of 
the community in which the school is located.

As of spring 2015, 128 Community Schools are already under development. 
As a result of this unprecedented commitment—and of the network of 
Community Schools currently being run by non-profits across the city—
New York City has become a national leader in the Community Schools 
movement, an educational movement focused on addressing students’ 
diverse needs, empowering parents to be active participants in their child’s 
education, and engaging entire communities around student success.

Over the next three years, we will implement a number of key system-
building initiatives to strengthen these schools, including developing a 
data framework, engaging parents and communities, building capacity, 
and fostering collaboration among City agencies. The City has already 
begun investigating how best to expand the existing Community Schools 

Salomé Ureña de Henríquez 
Campus School 

Located in Washington Heights, the Salomé 
Ureña de Henríquez Campus School is a 
Community School founded in a partner-
ship between The Children’s Aid Society, 
Community School District 6, local com-
munity-based partners, and the City of New 
York. Most students qualify for free school 
lunches, and a large number are English Lan-
guage learners. The school is as a prototype 
for community schools across the country.

Working with school staff, an on-site Com-
munity School director coordinates the activ-
ities and services offered to students. These 
services include afterschool, holiday, and 
summer programs; medical and preventative 
health services; and family and community 
engagement and development opportunities 
(such as a family resource room, vocational 
and educational training, and Advocacy and 
leadership opportunities). 

The school has offered mental health sup-
port to students and families in neighboring  
communities after major tragedies such as 
9/11, and emergency community support like 
water and cooling stations after incidents 
such as prolonged blackouts. 

nyc.gov/onenyc

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 

127

Historical Neighborhood  
Health Hub

network beyond our initial cohort of 128 schools, with the aim of ultimately 
transforming every school into a Community School. Given the large number of CBOs 
across New York City, there is ample opportunity to expand the network of partners.

The first cohort of Community Schools will provide important information on 
strong practices and lessons learned. We will draw on this experience when we 
release the next competitive RFP for 100 additional City-supported Community 
Schools, which will occur in 2017 or 2018. 

Initiative 2
Establish Neighborhood Health Hubs that co-locate 
clinical health and mental health services with 
social services and City agencies to foster improved 
coordination

Community health and service offerings are often fragmented, duplicative, and have 
persistent service gaps. Too often, despite an array of services provided by many 
dedicated organizations, there has not been the kind of impact needed to 
significantly improve population health.

Thus, the DOHMH will launch Neighborhood Health Hubs, which aim to eliminate 
health disparities and promote health equity. These health hubs revitalize a 1920s 
idea whereby CBOs, providers of medical and mental health services, and other New 
York City government agencies co-locate to provide coordinated services to 
neighborhood residents. The aim is to foster cross-sector work that addresses the 
root causes of health inequities—such as violence, low income, and low educational 
attainment—in communities with the greatest burden of disease, while building on 
the wealth of existing assets in those neighborhoods.

DOHMH will begin by establishing at least seven Neighborhood Health Hubs in 
neighborhoods with high health disparities. The first site is expected to be in East 
Harlem. These Neighborhood Health Hubs will be located inside DOHMH District 
Health buildings.

Building on this health hub model, additional City agencies are exploring new ways 
to co-locate their staffs with one another and with non-profit organizations. Not 
every access point to the government needs to be a City office. We will explore ways 
to embed staff from agencies in other institutions, including existing non-profits that 
already serve as trusted community providers. Staff can provide information and 
help residents navigate and enroll in available programs and services, register to 
vote, and access other civic services. In conjunction with the multi-service centers, 
these access points can reduce the challenges that residents have to get what they 
need, when they need it.

128

Integrated Government & Social Servicesnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 3
Enhance the digital capabilities of NYC 311 to provide 
easier connections to government and community 
services and information

We will continue to make it easier for residents to find information, enroll in 
programs, and provide feedback to the City online. Today, too much information is 
presented by individual agencies, which means residents must know the City’s 
organizational structure in order to discover relevant opportunities. We will make it 
easier for New Yorkers to search for and find relevant services and opportunities.

This enhanced digital platform will provide the same information available at the 
physical hub offices, without residents needing to visit an office to access 
information. Some of the tools that help residents discover relevant information and 
engage online have already been announced, including LinkNYC, which will offer 
up to a gigabit of free wireless in 10,000 locations, and Neighborhoods.nyc, which 
will provide domain names for community groups to develop a single neighborhood 
digital presence for civic engagement, online organizing, and information sharing.

311 is the single most recognizable and easy-to-access customer service tool for all 
New Yorkers. The digital capabilities of 311 will continue to be enhanced to provide 
easier connections to services and information and to simplify customer 
engagement. Customers will be able to create and manage their own accounts and 
relationship with the City and collaborate on content. They will also be able to 
unlock access to service requests and access data currently not available in the 
existing 311 system. Human Resources Administration (HRA) call centers will be 
merged with 311 to provide “one-stop shopping” for customers with multiple 
questions or needs. The expansion of social media and mobile app offerings will 
streamline the customer experience.

We will continue to develop other ways to enhance the digital experience of New 
York City residents so they can receive services and information in a more efficient 
and simple manner.

129

Integrated Government & Social Servicesnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City IDNYC
On January 12, 2015, the Mayor launched a 
major municipal identification (ID) initiative, 
IDNYC, to ensure every New Yorker has access 
to the opportunities, security, and peace of 
mind that comes with having government-is-
sued photo identification. There is a critical 
need for this program because approximately 
half of New York City residents age 16 and over 
do not have a New York State Driver License. 
The IDNYC card is helping more New Yorkers, 
regardless of immigration status, homeless 
status, or gender identity, access public- and 
private-sector services, programs, and benefits. 

The IDNYC card is broadly accepted across the 
city and provides eligibility for City services, entry 
to City buildings and schools, recognition by City 
agencies such as the NYPD, and opportunity to 
open bank accounts at select financial institutions.

The vision for the IDNYC card is to create a 
single card for each New Yorker’s wallet. This 
card integrates the various forms of identifi-
cation issued by local government, giving it 
dynamic value and expansive functionality. 
To supplement the card’s value as a form of 
identification, the City has developed a set of 
key partnerships with libraries, cultural insti-
tutions, and other organizations. Learn more at 
www.nyc.gov/idnyc.

Mayor de Blasio at an IDNYC enrollment center

Initiative 4
Expand the City’s internal data 
integration capacity to help ensure 
clients receive the right resources 
and service at the right times

The challenges faced by social service clients can cut 
across the purview of different City agencies. Many 
times, however, different agencies are unaware that 
they are working with the same clients. Technology-
enabled tools can help agencies better support 
individuals and families to achieve better results. For 
example, auto-notifications can alert caseworkers from 
different agencies that they share common clients 
(subject to privacy protections), which can help them 
coordinate support. With greater investments in 
integrated data systems, the City will also be able to 
better track the results of its programs. By examining 
the short- and long-term outcomes of interventions 
and services, we will be able to, over time, reallocate 
resources toward the most effective approaches.

Analytic tools can improve decision-making across a 
range of disciplines. In criminal justice, smarter use of 
data can not only inform criminal justice processing 
and programming decisions, but also be used to share 
data to improve residents’ health and safety. These 
tools are detailed further in the section below on 
Criminal Justice Reform.

To advance these and other solutions, the City aims to 
enhance its data platforms to be able to personalize and 
improve its social services work. By integrating data 
about the City’s people, places, and program activities, 
the City can conduct more powerful analyses and do a 
better job of sharing information among agencies about 
both community needs and specific individuals and 
families. This enhanced analytic capability will help us 
connect residents with the right services when they 
need them. It will also help us track the relative impact 
of the City’s funding streams and programmatic models 
so we can make more evidence-informed decisions 
about what works. Our initial scoping work for this 
“intelligent service platform” will begin this year.

130

Integrated Government & Social Servicesnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Brooklyn Public Library Central Library Branch

NYC Library Systems
 
New York City’s three library systems, comprising 210 branches across all five boroughs, offer 
free quality services to students, families, job-seekers, seniors, and anyone in need of informa-
tion or assistance as centers of learning and civic engagement. In addition to their important 
traditional services—circulating millions of books and supporting research by students and 
scholars alike—the libraries are expanding their roles and working in increasingly close 
partnership with the City to support the changing needs of our neighborhoods and residents. 

The library systems are assisting new immigrants by providing English Speakers of Other 
Languages (ESOL) classes, citizenship education, and support for immigrant small business 
owners and entrepreneurs in coordination with the Department of Small Business Services. 
The libraries are critical partners for the Department of Education in supporting students 
and families through early education services, after school programming, and homework 
support. Libraries are also helping us close the digital divide by offering Internet access 
in their buildings and lending Wi-Fi hotspots and other mobile devices for families to use 
at home. Libraries help strengthen our communities by offering cultural and recreational 
neighborhoods, and serving as resident service centers in times of emergency.

The library systems are also critical partners on major citywide initiatives including 
IDNYC, Pre-K for All, and OneNYC. Together, we are ensuring that all people have access 
to the many resources and opportunities our City has to offer. 

131

Integrated Government & Social Servicesnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Vision 2

INDICATORS + TARGETS

 Increase the average  
number of servings of fruits 
and vegetables that adult 
New Yorkers eat per day by 
25 percent, from 2.4 to 
 3 servings, by 2035

 Increase the percentage 
of adult New Yorkers who 
meet physical-activity  
recommendations from  
67 percent to 80 percent  
by 2035

 Increase the percentage of 
New York City public high 
school students who report  
meeting recommended 
levels of aerobic physical 
activity from 19 percent to 
30 percent by 2035

 Decrease asthma emergency  
department visits by  
children by 25 percent, 
299 per 10,000 to 224 per 
10,000, by 2035

Healthy Neighborhoods, Active Living

Goal: New Yorkers of all ages will live, work, 
learn, and play in neighborhoods that promote an 
active and healthy lifestyle

Overview
The access New Yorkers have to nutritious food and beverages, opportunities for 
physical activity, and quality housing play a large role in determining their physical 
and mental wellbeing and their ability to fulfill their potential. Many New York City 
neighborhoods have considerable room for improvement in promoting good health 
and wellbeing, with large disparities in opportunities for healthy living and health 
outcomes between high-poverty and low-poverty neighborhoods. We will 
implement several initiatives to ensure all New Yorkers live in neighborhoods and 
housing that promote healthy lives.

Initiative 1
Improve food access, affordability, and quality, and 
encourage a sustainable, resilient food system

Quality food is fundamental to a healthy life. However, the City’s current food 
system does not allow for equitable access to nutritious food. There are broken links 
between food production, sales to distributors and wholesale buyers, and delivery to 
consumers that result in inequitable distribution of and access to healthy food.

Moreover, approximately 1.4 million New Yorkers, or one in six, report they are food 
insecure, a result of unemployment, poverty, and other household characteristics. 
Food insecure families may worry that food will run out before they have enough 
money to buy more, eat less than they should, or be unable to afford to eat balanced 
meals. The availability, quality, and affordability of food affect the quality of New 
Yorkers’ diets. Cardiovascular disease, which is often connected to poor diet, is the 
leading cause of death for men and women in New York City.

Increased fruit and vegetable consumption is associated with a decreased risk of 
chronic diseases such as hypertension, heart disease, and stroke. Not all New 
Yorkers consume the same amount. The 2013 Community Health Survey reported 
the lowest levels of consumption were among black and Hispanic New Yorkers, 
those with low education levels, and those living in high-poverty neighborhoods.

Our goal is to increase the average number of servings of fruits and vegetables adult 
New Yorkers eat every day by 25 percent, from 2.4 to 3 mean servings, in the next 

nyc.gov/onenyc

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 

132

Vision 2

Healthy Neighborhoods, Active Living

Adults eating five or more daily servings of 
fruits or vegetables by neighborhood
Percent, 2011-2013

Quartiles

4%-7%

8%-10%

11%-13%

14%-21%

no population

DOHMH, Community Healthy Survey

twenty years. The City will undertake a variety of 
initiatives aimed at promoting access to nutritious, 
quality food for all New Yorkers, especially those 
most in need.

Supporting Initiatives
A. Increase the share of regional food in the New 
York City food system through investments in the 
regional food distribution system

Our region produces high-quality, nutritious foods, 
including fruits and vegetables, legumes, meat, and 
dairy. Farmers in the region are interested in selling 
more products in the New York City market, but face 
distribution and other barriers. By investing in the 
regional food distribution system, we can increase the 
availability of local food for the city’s consumers 
across the income scale, while also enlarging the 
market for local and regional farmers in the city.

Increasing the amount of food from the region has 
broader benefits. It will reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions from shipping food from far away, make 
our food system more resilient to climate change and other potential disasters, 
and create jobs locally and across the region.

To increase access to good quality food produced in the region, the City will work 
with the State on the Regional Food Hubs Task Force, which was launched in 
March 2015. We will act on its recommendations to increase the amount of 
regionally-produced food coming into the city through investments in the food 
system. Furthermore, upstate farmland that feeds the city and protects our water 
supply is disappearing. We will work with the State to conserve the region’s 
agricultural land for farming.

“Make it appealing for 
supermarkets to open in 
high-population areas so 
people can have access to 
nutritious foods at 
reasonable prices.”

—Phyllis G., Manhattan

B. Expand and improve quality of New York City school food

The City’s public school system has 1.1 million students, about 75 percent of 
whom qualify for free lunch. Providing over 160 million meals a year, the NYC 
Department of Education (DOE) runs the largest school food-service program in 
the United States. This program has enormous reach and buying power such that 
its potential to transform the eating habits, nutrition, and food security of young 
New Yorkers is monumental.

nyc.gov/onenyc

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 

133

“Start with our children. 
We need to educate 
students about how to 
foster good mental, 
physical, and 
environmental health”. 

—Kate G., Manhattan

To ensure no public school student goes hungry, and that all are ready to learn, we 
will work to increase participation in school meal programs.

We must also improve the lunchroom experience and environment for students. 
To promote participation in meal programs, and healthy choices, we will begin by 
renovating 45 middle and high school cafeterias over five years with new 
furniture, paint, and improvements to serving lines. 

To improve the quality of food served, the City will continue to increase 
procurement of sustainable, healthy, and local food and supplies. We will promote 
food and environmental education by increasing student engagement with 
gardens—both by working to increase the number of school gardens and 
facilitating school partnerships with existing gardens. By investing in the quality 
of our school food, we will continue to provide nutritious meals to families and 
children that need them, and help build healthy eating habits in New Yorkers at a 
young age, promoting a lifetime of healthy eating.

C. Ensure all communities have access to fresh food retail options, with a 

special focus on traditionally underserved neighborhoods

New Yorkers see significant disparities in their neighborhood food options. A 
survey of the food stores in the Crotona-Tremont neighborhood of the Bronx in 
2012 found that for every supermarket in the neighborhood, there were four fast 
food restaurants and ten bodegas. We have an opportunity to work with the 
private sector to improve the food marketplace and access to healthy food for 
those in need.

To improve the availability of healthy food in retail settings, we will expand on the 
City’s work to attract new supermarkets to underserved neighborhoods and 
encourage renovations and upgrades of existing small or independent grocery stores.

We will also work with the private and non-profit sectors to explore innovations 
and business growth in food retail, including health- and community-focused 
grocery stores, restaurants, and corner stores. Improving the nutritional quality and 
affordability of the food available citywide will encourage better health outcomes 
for all and will have positive effects on job creation and economic development.

In addition, we will support and expand initiatives to provide fresh food options 
to underserved neighborhoods. For example, we will support and expand fresh 
food box programs that bring an affordable basket of fresh fruits and vegetables 
to community settings such as childcare centers. This means ensuring the 
non-profit providers of these programs have the resources they need to be 
viable and expand; and that we help community settings get a program like this 

134

Healthy Neighborhoods, Active Livingnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City to their area. We will work with community 
organizations to bring new community-based 
farmers markets to underserved neighborhoods. 
These initiatives will be complemented by an 
annual distribution of in Health Bucks—vouchers 
that can be used to purchase fresh fruits and 
vegetables—to provide additional buying power 
for local and fresh foods among low-income 
consumers.

D. Support community gardens and urban farms 

in select neighborhoods in the city

Urban agriculture plays a small but critical role in 
communities underserved by quality, affordable, 
fresh food. Urban farming provides opportunities 
for residents to engage in growing local produce, 
educates children about nutrition, and offers 
training in food preparation, gardening, and 
retailing skills. By offering young people jobs in 
the youth markets and providing formal 
horticulture training for community members, 
urban agriculture also provides opportunities for 
workforce development.

To encourage the growth of the urban farming 
sector, the City will support community gardens 
in neighborhoods with necessary infrastructure. 
We will also support these gardens with 
assistance in selling produce at farm stands and 
teaching nutrition and cooking. We will work to 
support school gardens, and educate students 
about nutrition, gardening, and science.

We will also support larger-scale urban farming 
ventures, and establish food-producing gardens at 
NYCHA sites through it’s Gardening and 
Greening program. We will study additional 
emerging urban agriculture opportunities, such 
as vertical farming projects, to activate 
underutilized light industrial space and offer 
related community programing.

135

New Yorker enjoying locally-grown fresh produce

Building Healthy Communities 

Building Healthy Communities is a place-based initiative that 
recognizes a community’s health is not limited to access to med-
ical care. Physical health, mental health, and quality of life are 
critical elements for improving social wellbeing. Vibrant public 
open spaces are a crucial feature of livable urban neighbor-
hoods. Parks, pedestrian plazas, community gardens, and recre-
ation centers are essential community resources where people 
come together to play, learn, grow food, exercise, and relax.

Yet many of our most densely populated and highest poverty  
neighborhoods have historically been neglected in public 
investment in the preservation, rehabilitation, and activation of 
open spaces and playgrounds. Many of these same communities 
continue to report high rates of crime and equally high rates of 
obesity and diabetes.

Over the next three years, Building Healthy Communities aims 
to address these inequities and improve community health 
outcomes in our neediest neighborhoods by increasing access 
to physical activity and nutritious and affordable food, and pro-
moting public safety in 55 of the city’s neighborhoods that were 
targeted by the Department of Parks and Recreation in its Com-
munity Parks Initiative. Leveraging the capital investment of the 
Community Parks Initiative, Building Healthy Communities will 
activate the neighborhood parks and surrounding open spaces, 
including streets, sidewalks, schools, and community gardens 
offering physical activity programs, cooking classes, nutrition 
education, and farmers’ markets. This initiative supports our 
efforts across Vision 2 and Vision 3.

Healthy Neighborhoods, Active Livingnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 2
Create environments that encourage New Yorkers to be 
physically active regardless of age

Physical activity is beneficial for overall health and wellness, leading to lower risk of 
developing chronic diseases, greater cardiorespiratory fitness, stronger muscles, better 
bone strength, and higher self-esteem. Still, 33 percent of all adults and 43 percent of 
older adults in New York City fail to meet physical activity recommendations, putting 
them at higher risk for heart disease, diabetes, stroke, and falls. 

Residents living in poor or predominantly minority neighborhoods are less likely 
to have clean, safe, and attractive places to be physically active. Consequently, 
physical activity levels are often correlated with income, race, and neighborhood. 
In New York City, 37 percent of residents in very high-poverty neighborhoods fail 
to meet physical activity recommendations compared to 29 percent in low-poverty 
neighborhoods. 

A strong body of evidence demonstrates how one’s physical environment 
influences physical activity. For example, residents in neighborhoods with 

Inactive

Insufficiently active

Sufficiently active

57

38

64

33

Level of physical activity by age
Percent, 2013

75

72

24

27

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1

1

3

5

18-24 years 

25-44 years

45-64 years

64 and over

DOHMH community health survey

136

Healthy Neighborhoods, Active Livingnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City recreational facilities are more likely to use them and be more active; and making 
stairs accessible and attractive is associated with increased stair use. By increasing 
access to physical activity space in and around schools, to commercial and 
community recreational facilities, and to accessible stairs, the City will increase 
opportunities for physical activity for all New Yorkers. And we will work to reduce 
inequities in access to environments that support physical activity by focusing 
these efforts on low-income neighborhoods.

Supporting Initiatives
A. Increase opportunities for physical activity in and around schools

As children spend about half of their waking hours in school, schools are uniquely 
positioned to play a role in improving physical activity levels of students. 

To encourage active play at school, the City will explore enhancing existing 
school yards by painting colorful ground markings including games, tracks, and 
other creative designs. Painted ground markings have been shown to be a low-
cost but effective way to increase physical activity.

B. Increase design elements that promote physical activity in buildings

New Yorkers, on average, spend over 90 percent of their time indoors. As the City 
constructs and renovates buildings, we will take advantage of the opportunities to 
apply Design Guidelines for Healthy Living building elements such as secure 
bicycle storage, accessible stairs, indoor and outdoor recreation space for building 
users, and building exteriors that contribute to making the streetscape welcoming 
for pedestrians. The City will expand the scope of Department of Design and 
Construction (DDC) projects to incorporate Design Guidelines for Healthy Living 
strategies such as stair improvements, bicycle storage, and fitness rooms. 

Further, we aim to improve stair use by supporting legislation that, consistent 
with the recommendation of the Green Codes Task Force, requires new buildings 
and certain major renovations to include at least one stairway that is easily 
accessible and open for use. 

We will continue to explore incentives for residential building owners receiving 
City financing for new construction and substantial rehabilitation to promote 
physical activity through Design Guidelines for Healthy Living. We also support 
passing the Department of City Planning Zoning for Quality and Affordability text 
amendment, introduced in February 2015, which would remove obsolete 
provisions and modernize other zoning provisions to foster diverse and livable 
neighborhoods. The text amendment, for example, would allow ground floors to 
accommodate more active uses and add interest to the streetscape. 

137

Open, accessible, and attractive 
stairs promote stair use. The NYC 
Health Department’s Riverside 
Health Center received a LEED 
innovation credit entitled “Design 
for Health through Increased 
Physical Activity” for including 
active design features such as the 
enhanced stairs, a physical exer-
cise room and bicycle racks, and 
shower facilities for staff

Riverside Health Center’s  
renovation and exapansion  
promotes health

Healthy Neighborhoods, Active Livingnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City C. Provide opportunities for physical activity in the community for residents 

of all abilities

People are more likely to exercise and be active when they have quality, affordable, 
and accessible recreational facilities. The City is working to ensure such facilities 
are available to all New Yorkers. New York City will build off the success of existing 
adult exercise equipment in the City by co-locating universally accessible age-
appropriate adult exercise equipment in or near playgrounds, where feasible. 

Beyond this, the City will encourage the creation of community recreation centers and 
commercial gyms by exploring the elimination of special permit requirements for gyms 
in certain districts and by conducting outreach to gym and recreation center operators. 

Furthermore, Parks Without Borders will pursue new and better ways to connect 
neighborhoods to the city’s parks and make our streets, sidewalks, and other 
pedestrian plazas more inviting public spaces (detailed further in Vision 3). 

Finally, to ensure New York City active and healthy design initiatives meet the 
needs and priorities of the communities we serve, we will conduct community 
engagement as part of Department of City Planning (DCP) comprehensive 
neighborhood studies, with the goal of creating neighborhoods with access to key 
facilities and services and a more vibrant street life.

By integrating opportunities for physical activity into the environments where we live, 
work, study, and play, we will make staying active and healthy easier for all New Yorkers.

Initiative 3
Address health hazards in homes

The home environment is critical to the health and wellbeing of people of all ages. When 
homes are poorly maintained or not designed to promote safety and health, occupants can 
be exposed to a variety of health hazards, such as asthma triggers and fall hazards.

Supporting Initiatives
A. Reduce asthma triggers in the home 

Asthma affects nearly one million New Yorkers and is the most common chronic 
respiratory disease in children. More than one in three children with asthma living 
in high poverty neighborhoods are exposed to potential asthma triggers in the home. 
Home-based asthma triggers include tobacco smoke, pest infestations, moisture, and 
mold, as well as some building materials and products. Housing disrepair, such as 
water leaks, cracks, and holes, create housing conditions conducive to pest 
infestation and mold growth. Living in pest-free environments is correlated with 
children having the ability to fulfill their potential; for children with asthma, specific 

138

Healthy Neighborhoods, Active Livingnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Housing asthma triggers by income

E
G
A
T
N
E
C
R
E
P

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

35.6

34.7

372.8

23.6

22.2

176.6

107.2

16.6

12.1

12.4

6.8

5.8

3.0

11.8

9.5

3.2

11.4

6.9

Low Poverty

Medium Poverty

High Poverty

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

)

S
T
N
E
D

I

S
E
R

 

0

0

0

,

0

1

 

R
E
P

(

 

E
T
A
R

Homes with cockroaches (%)

Homes with mice or rats in  
building (%)

Homes with 3 or more 
maintenance deficiencies (%)

Adults reporting mold in the 
home (%)

Adults reporting second-hand 
smoke in the home (%)

Asthma emergency department 
visits among children 5-17 years 
(rate per 10,000)

Data obtained from NYC Department of Health 
and Mental Hygiene, Environment and Health 
Data Portal, March 23, 2015
http://www.nyc.gov/html/doh/html/
environmental/tracking.shtml
*Neighborhoods are ranked according to the 
percent of people whose annual income falls 
below twice the federal poverty level. Rankings 
are then divided into 3 approximately equal 
groupings of low, medium and high poverty. 
Then the median value of the selected indicator 
is displayed for each poverty grouping. The 
median is the exact mid-point of the individual 
environment or health indicator values for each 
neighborhood within a grouping.

N E I G H B O R H O O D   P O V E R T Y

housing interventions have been shown to be effective in reducing allergens, 
resulting in fewer symptom days, missed school days, and emergency room visits. 
Secondhand smoke is also a powerful asthma trigger, with exposure occurring when 
there is a smoker in the household or smoke travels from one apartment to another. 

New York City will fund a roof replacement program in NYCHA developments 
which will address the root causes of mold. The City will also implement a joint 
HPD-DOHMH enforcement initiative focused on housing with egregious pest 
infestation. Efforts will target neighborhoods at highest risk for asthma, with 
building owners required to implement safe pest-control measures using integrated 
pest management (IPM). 

Additionally, we will explore creating strong incentives for building owners receiving 
City financing for new construction or substantial rehabilitation to use IPM, a 
comprehensive and prevention-based approach to pest control, smoke-free policies, 
safer building materials/products, and moisture/mold control. Each year, the City 
receives applications from affordable housing owners and developers for the 
financing of new construction or the financing of substantial and moderate 
rehabilitation of existing housing, impacting an estimated 16,000 housing units per 
year. These “financing moments” provide important opportunities to promote the use 

139

Healthy Neighborhoods, Active Livingnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City of healthy building practices that reduce asthma triggers in the home. By integrating 
simple, often low-  cost healthy housing measures into building design and 
construction, renovation, and ongoing operations and maintenance, our buildings will 
be healthier places to live. 

B. Decrease secondhand smoke exposure in the home

There is no safe level of exposure to secondhand smoke (SHS). Non-smokers exposed 
to secondhand smoke in the home have higher risks of asthma attacks, heart disease, 
lung cancer, and chronic respiratory disease. Children and the elderly are particularly 
affected by SHS exposure in the home because they are more vulnerable to its health 
effects, and because they typically spend more time at home. Secondhand smoke 
complaints are common, with 40 percent of adult New Yorkers reporting smelling 
cigarette smoke in their home that comes from another home or apartment or from 
the outside. We are already making strides to dramatically reduce SHS. An 
overwhelming majority of non-smokers (81 percent) and most smokers (53 percent) 
in New York City do not allow smoking in their homes. And 69 percent of New York 
City adults support smoke-free housing. To address secondhand smoke, a primary 
driver of unhealthy indoor air quality, the City will work to pass legislation requiring 
multi-unit housing to have a smoking policy and to disclose it to residents and 
prospective residents. To complement this, we will explore opportunities for the 
adoption of other smoke-free housing policies in New York City.

Together, these strategies will work to reduce asthma triggers in the home, which will 
decrease the percentage of homes with housing conditions associated with asthma. 

C. Reduce housing-related fall hazards for older adults 

Falls are the leading cause of injury-related hospitalizations and deaths among 
older adults in New York City, causing an average of 17,000 hospitalizations and 
nearly 300 deaths each year. Fall-related hospitalization charges total more than 
$750 million. There are currently more than one million older adults (age 65 or 
older) in the city, and the older adult population is expected to grow by 41 percent 
to 1.41 million by 2040, which could dramatically increase the burden of falls and 
their associated costs. 

Most falls among older adults occur at home. Finding and fixing fall hazards in 
the home is effective in lowering both the risk of falls and the rate of falls among 
older adults. By 2030, all City contracts for providing home-based services for 
older adults will require an assessment for fall hazards, as per the DOHMH 
recommendation. In addition, for new construction, the City will promote the 
adoption of universal design elements such as grab bars, hand rails, slip-resistant 
floors, and lighting that reduces the risks of falls. Similarly, for existing buildings, 
the City will provide incentives for in-place retrofits for these measures aimed at 
promoting safe home environments and preventing falls among older adults. 

By reducing housing-related fall hazards for older adults, we will reduce the 
number of falls in the home, keeping our aging population healthy and safe.

140

Healthy Neighborhoods, Active Livingnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Age
Friendly
NYC

Enhancing Our City’s
Livability for Older
New Yorkers

Michael R. Bloomberg
Mayor
Christine C. Quinn
City Council Speaker

Age Friendly NYC
 
Soon, older adults in New York City will outnumber school-aged children. To prepare for this 
demographic shift, the Office of the Mayor, the New York City Council, and the New York 
Academy of Medicine have partnered to create Age Friendly NYC. Age Friendly NYC is dedi-
cated to ensuring our older population is healthy, active, and engaged. Initiatives that support 
the efforts of Age Friendly NYC include:

  Increased mobility through accessible transportation: As further detailed in Vision 1,  

the City aims to expand use of yellow and green taxis—including the growing number of 
wheelchair accessible yellows and greens—to provide faster and more convenient paratransit 
services to New Yorkers with disabilities. Additionally, DOT is planning to install attractive 
and durable  benches around the city, particularly in areas with high concentrations of se-
niors, to make streets more comfortable for transit riders and pedestrians.

  Convenient healthy and nutritious food: The City will explore improved meal- and 
grocery-delivery programs that will improve access to seniors and people with dis-
abilities whose limited mobility and fixed incomes make it challenging to purchase 
nutritious food.

141

Healthy Neighborhoods, Active Livingnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Healthcare Access

Goal: All New Yorkers will have access to the 
physical and mental healthcare services that 
they need

Overview
In 2013, nearly one million New York City residents felt they did not receive the 
medical care they needed in the past year, with residents of the poorest 
neighborhoods reporting they were receiving the least care. Residents of these 
low-income neighborhoods also bear a greater burden of specific diseases, such as 
heart disease, diabetes, and infant deaths, when compared to other neighborhoods. 
For example, more than a third of residents of very high-poverty neighborhoods 
have been diagnosed with high blood pressure; by contrast, less than a quarter of 
residents of low-poverty neighborhoods were diagnosed with high blood pressure.

Mental health and substance abuse issues affect many New Yorkers. Fifteen percent 
of all New Yorkers report having been diagnosed with depression. However, the 
highest prevalence is in high-poverty neighborhoods. In the poorest New York City 
neighborhoods, seven percent of residents experience serious psychological distress 
(SPD), compared to three percent in the wealthiest neighborhoods.

To reduce disparities in health outcomes, the City will work to develop a healthcare 
delivery system that emphasizes an integrated and patient-centered approach to 
care that is delivered in convenient and accessible locations.

Mental and physical healthcare access
Percentage of NYC residents that received the care that they need  
by neighborhood poverty, 2013

Medical care

Mental health counseling or treatment

93%

89%

87%

87%

62%

59%

55%

47%

Lowest poverty  

(wealthiest)

Medium poverty  

High poverty

Very high poverty 

(poorest)

142

INDICATORS + TARGETS

 Increase the percentage 
of adult New Yorkers who 
feel they have received the 
medical care they needed in 
the past 12 months

 Increase the percentage of 
adult New Yorkers with  
serious psychological 
distress who have received 
counseling or taken a pre-
scription medication for a 
mental health problem

100

80

60

40

20

Medical care is percentage of adult 
New Yorkers that feel they received 
the medical care that they have 
needed in the past 12 months
Mental health is percentage of adult 
New Yorkers with serious 
psychological distress that have 
taken a prescription medication for 
a mental health problem

nyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City De Blasio protests the  
layoffs of 500 LICH nurses  
and healthcare workers

Initiative 1

Ensure all New York City neighborhoods have access to 
high-quality essential healthcare services

Over the past decade, far too many New York City communities have lost critical 
healthcare services due to the closure of hospitals essential to their wellbeing. 
Changes in the science of healthcare delivery and healthcare reimbursement are 
realities we have to face. But New York City cannot allow neighborhoods to lack 
critical medical services. And we certainly cannot allow the closure of major 
hospital facilities that would leave communities without essential healthcare. 

For these reasons, Mayor de Blasio called for the creation of several new models in 
healthcare, including the Brooklyn Health Authority, to ensure that no community is 
left without essential care services. The Authority’s role was envisioned as ensuring 
adequate funding, leading integrated planning, and promoting the new types of 
coordinated healthcare service delivery models that protect families and workers 
given the shifting healthcare landscape. 

There have been major developments since the Mayor’s initial proposal for the 
Authority several years ago. Thanks to the support of the federal government, 
Governor Cuomo, and Mayor de Blasio, the $8 billion Medicaid waiver was 
approved by the Obama Administration in April 2014. $6.4 billion of this waiver is 
explicitly designed to help hospitals across the state restructure their care delivery 
models to reflect the most current science and reimbursement structures. New York 
City’s hospitals now have the opportunity and resources to make planned, orderly 
reforms rather than resorting to the sudden closures that marked the previous 
decade, while improving the quality and experience of care across the city.

The implementation of these changes has already significantly altered the healthcare 
landscape in New York. New hospital networks called Performing Provider Systems 
(PPSs) have developed across the city and pair some of the city’s most financially 
stressed institutions with those that are more stable. If used properly by the networks, 
Medicaid waiver funds can prevent major hospital closures and ensure that every 
community in New York City has access to essential healthcare.

The City must remain vigilant however to ensure these one-time funds are used 
appropriately and effectively. The City remains steadfast in its commitment that 
every community has access to the care it needs. We will fight for critical 
healthcare services across the City and not accept the closure of any more 
hospitals in Brooklyn or any other communities which would be left without the 
medical care we need. This commitment includes investments made by the   
New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation (HHC) (see Initiative 2) and the 
City’s own initiative to create more than 16 community-based primary care centers 
in under-served areas (see Initiative 3). These actions, as well as direct 
engagement with the major private health systems in New York City and 

143

Health Care Accessnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City NYC Health and Hospitals
Corporation (HHC) coverage

Acute Care Hospital

Community Health Center

Diagnostic Treatment Center

Long Term Care/Nursing Home

Mobile Medical Unit

School Based clinic

HHC

continued review and development of new structural mechanisms, such as the 
local Brooklyn Health Authority or other options, will ensure that our city has a 
strong healthcare delivery system.

Initiative 2
Transform NYC Health and Hospitals Corporation into a 
system anchored by community-based preventive care

New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation (HHC), the nation’s largest public 
healthcare system, serves 1.4 million people every year, approximately one out of six 
New Yorkers.  HHC’s role as the city’s largest safety net provider is critical to 
ensuring all New Yorkers have access to healthcare regardless of their ability or pay 
or documentation status. Close to half a million of HHC’s patients are uninsured 
and/or undocumented. 

144

Health Care Accessnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City In addition to its role in providing care for vulnerable New Yorkers, HHC is well 
positioned to lead transformation of the healthcare delivery system in the City because 
it offers a comprehensive array of healthcare services. Through its seven regional 
healthcare networks, HHC operates 11 acute care hospitals, four long-term care 
facilities, six diagnostic and treatment centers, a certified home health program, and 
more than 60 community-based health clinics throughout the five boroughs. In 
addition, MetroPlus, HHC’s wholly-owned health insurance company, takes care of 
more than 469,000 New Yorkers annually. HHC also provides emergency and 
inpatient services to New York City’s inmate population at City correctional facilities, 
and HHC conducts mental health evaluations. 

Given the recent shifts in the City’s healthcare landscape, HHC, like the other large 
hospital systems, is transforming from a healthcare system focused on delivering 
inpatient services to those who are already sick to a model of care that keeps people 
healthy throughout their entire lives.  This transformation requires HHC to invest in 
new models of care coupled with a new infrastructure.  

Supporting Initiatives
A. Create health access points embedded in communities rather than hospital 

campuses

In 2015, HHC is rolling out a primary care expansion aimed at providing care to 
100,000 additional patients in under-served neighborhoods across the five boroughs 
though a combination of expanded service offerings at existing and new HHC 
Gotham Health community clinic locations, including a newly constructed clinic on 
Staten Island. In addition, as one of only two PPSs that serve all five boroughs, HHC’s 
Medicaid waiver projects that increase community-based primary care and 
behavioral healthcare will have a significant impact throughout the city. Finally, when 
patients seek primary care in hospital emergency rooms, HHC is connecting patients 
without primary care providers to settings ensuring continuity of care.

B. Ensure critical hospital services are fully functioning in the face of increased 

demand, weather disasters, and aging infrastructure

The Elmhurst emergency room, where patient volume is expected to increase by 20 
percent given hospital closings in the catchment area, is in design phase for its 
planned renovation and expansion. Significant infrastructure projects underway at 
Coney Island, Bellevue, Metropolitan and Coler Goldwater hospitals are designed 
to ensure these facilities can continue operating during future weather disasters 
(see Vision 4 for more detail).  Finally, ongoing infrastructure upgrades at HHC 
facilities are essential to meet new regulatory requirements and safety initiatives.

C. Adequately provide healthcare services to New York City’s growing senior 

population

A key part of transforming HHC’s system is tailoring care to the needs of different 

145

Health Care Accessnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City populations to ensure their care is the most appropriate and effective.  In 
particular, recognizing New York City’s growing senior population, HHC is 
including age-appropriate designs in its infrastructure projects.  This translates 
into exam rooms, diagnostic treatment areas and bathrooms meeting wheelchair 
and walker space requirements, and soundproofing of rooms to improve 
communication between patient and provider for patients with hearing 
impairments.  HHC also plans to transform the Seaview Campus on Staten Island, 
which currently offers services for seniors, it into a vibrant healthcare destination 
site which will meet the ongoing needs of the surrounding community.

By strengthening HHC’s infrastructure and adapting to the changes in the 
healthcare environment, HHC will continue to be a leader improving the health 
of all New Yorkers. 

Initiative 3
Expand access to primary care by establishing health 
clinics in high-need communities

Healthcare is an essential component of creating and maintaining healthy 
communities, and primary care is a key part of this equation. High-quality primary 
care provides a “medical home” for individuals and ensures they get the right care, 
in the right setting, by the most appropriate practitioner, and in a manner consistent 
with their desires and values. A close partnership between providers and patients 
helps patients navigate an increasingly complex healthcare system and strive toward 
better health outcomes.

In New York City, there are 26 neighborhoods federally designated as primary-care 
shortage areas. Even this measure undercounts the real need, as neighborhoods 
must apply for this federal designation.

To address inequalities in access to primary care the City will help create at least 16 
health clinics by the end of 2017 in neighborhoods identified by the Community 
Healthcare Association of New York State as being in need of additional primary-
care services. Some of these clinics will be based in New York City Department of 
Health and Mental Hygiene (DOHMH) Neighborhood Health Hubs (detailed 
further in goal on Integrated Government & Social Services), collaborating with 
other local organizations to improve health in their communities. Additionally, New 
York City HHC’s Gotham health network and other federally qualified health 
centers will expand to new locations to address the need for primary care.

146

Health Care Accessnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Unmet need for 
mental health 
treatment in  
New York City

23 percent of NYC adults 
experiencing serious  
psychological distress 
reported not getting the 
medical treatment that  
they needed in the past year

41 percent of New Yorkers 
with serious mental illness 
reported not getting the med-
ical treatment they needed 

56 percent of New Yorkers 
with SPD reported not  
getting any outpatient men-
tal health treatment at all

Initiative 4
Expand access points for mental health and substance 
abuse care, including integrating primary care and 
behavioral health services 

Mental health concerns are widespread in New York City. Fifteen percent of New 
Yorkers reported having been diagnosed with depression, and 12 percent of the city’s 
adult population reported receiving some form of counseling or taking prescription 
medication for a mental health problem in the past year. In 2013, five percent of the 
New York City adult population experienced serious psychological distress (SPD), 
which is characterized by a range of symptoms commonly present in individuals 
with mental illness but are not specific to any particular disorder. Mental health 
issues are not distributed evenly across the City. New Yorkers with serious mental 
illness are overwhelmingly of low- and moderate-income, with 39 percent living 
below the federal poverty line. Mental health concerns are also much more 
prevalent among those with physical health issues. 

There is significant unmet need for mental health treatment in the city. Twenty-
three percent of New York City adults experiencing SPD reported they did not get 
all the mental health treatment they needed in the past year, as did 41 percent of 
New Yorkers with serious mental illness. Barriers to receiving necessary mental 
health treatment include language difficulties, stigma, difficulty with navigating the 
mental health system, and cost. Immigrant populations may be more likely to 
experience stigma around mental, emotional, and behavioral (MEB) health and may 
be less familiar with their communities’ health resources. Additionally, the 
behavioral healthcare system is fragmented and poorly integrated with the primary 
care system. 

NYC HHC intends to improve the overall health of New Yorkers with mental health 
and substance-abuse diagnoses by scaling two best practice approaches: first, 
co-located and integrated substance-abuse and mental health specialty services, and 
second, integrated behavioral healthcare in primary care through the integrated 
Collaborative Care model—a collaborative team of a primary-care providers, care 
management staff (e.g., nurses), and psychiatric consultants. Each of the models 
requires providers to build deep relationships with community-based organizations, 
social-services agencies, and government agencies able to identify patients in need, 
engage them, and assist in supporting their treatment. 

147

Health Care Accessnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 5
Work with New York State in enabling and supporting 
the transformation of the healthcare delivery system

The aforementioned initiatives are cornerstones of our vision of all New Yorkers 
living fully realized lives. But New York City can’t do it alone. As the primary 
regulatory entity, the State plays a critical role in shaping who can deliver 
healthcare, how and where those services are provided, and how services are paid 
for within New York City. The City stands ready to partner with the State to 
implement changes to the healthcare system that will ensure high-quality, 
coordinated care for all New Yorkers.

Supporting Initiatives
A. Integrate patient data across healthcare systems

Since 2009, thousands of healthcare providers have adopted and are using 
electronic health records. However, few are connected to systems that enable 
sharing of medical and behavioral health information between care settings or 
with supportive services organizations. According to the New York eHealth 
Collaborative (NYeC), only two percent of clinical practice sites are connected in 
New York City and 14 percent across New York State. Furthermore, based on 
DOHMH’s health information connectivity data, only about five percent of 7,000 
primary-care providers listed in its database are connected to a health-
information exchange.

The lack of information-sharing is associated with duplicative testing, delays in 
care, and incomplete information—all issues that have resulted in poorer health 
outcomes and higher costs to the City and State. A recent study found that up to 
32 percent of patient records reviewed had duplicative testing documented. This 
fragmentation of healthcare and supportive services affects New Yorkers across 
all five boroughs and is especially problematic for people with low health literacy, 
limited English-language proficiency, limited mobility, mental or behavioral 
health conditions, previous incarceration, or other factors that can make 
accessing care more difficult. 

A call-to-action is needed to accelerate federal and state programs to integrate 
patient information of New Yorkers across healthcare delivery and supportive 
systems, as well as across jurisdictional lines. The City stands ready to partner 
with the State to implement changes to the healthcare system so all New Yorkers 
can receive high-quality, coordinated care.

148

Health Care Accessnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City We have already made strides in this direction. In 2006, the New York State 
Department of Health (NYSDOH), in cooperation with healthcare leaders in New 
York State, established a public-private partnership to develop and operate the 
Statewide Health Information Network of New York (SHIN-NY). SHIN-NY 
facilitates the exchange of patient information across health settings anywhere in 
the state. Additional effort is still needed to scale up the information exchange 
process to as many provider types as possible and incorporate data from related 
health and social support services (e.g., social work, community health, school 
health).

B. Transform the Medicaid reimbursement methodology

To change the way healthcare works, we need to change the way we pay for 
it. Currently, we pay less for preventive care that keeps people healthy and more 
for healthcare services when people get sick. In particular, payments for 
preventive care, including primary care, and other services delivered in outpatient 
settings need to incentivize greater provision of these services. In addition, 
services and supports that help keep people healthy, such as telemedicine, 
effective health information technology, and care coordination should be paid 
appropriately. The City will work with New York State in altering what and how 
Medicaid pays for these services.

149

Health Care Accessnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City INDICATORS + TARGETS

 Decrease the crime rate

 Decrease the average daily 
population (ADP) in jail

 Decrease the percentage of 
domestic violence victims 
turned away from shelters

Criminal Justice Reform

Goal: Among large U.S. cities, New York will 
continue to be the safest, and will have the lowest 
rate of incarceration, with a criminal justice system 
that leads the nation in fairness and efficiency

Overview
Twenty years ago, no one thought we could control crime. In 1993, there were 1,946 
murders and 99,207 burglaries in New York City. In 2013, both of those numbers had 
dropped by more than 80 percent. The city ended 2014 with the lowest murder rate 
in the city’s history.
Plummeting crime has also meant a shrinking jail population. At the end of 2014, for 
the first time in thirty years, Rikers Island had fewer than 10,000 inmates, less than 
half of its high-water mark of 21,688 in 1991.

This extraordinary progress is proof we can have both more safety and less 
incarceration. And it is one of many things that set New York City apart: while 
incarceration climbed seven percent elsewhere in the country between 1996 and 2012, 
the city saved billions by reducing crime and unnecessary incarceration.

In the next twenty years, New York City will continue to be a national leader in public 
safety. This will mean continuing to strengthen the things we are already doing—such as 
data-driven policing—but it will also mean investing in people and neighborhoods. We 
will provide opportunities for individuals to lead productive lives. Cohesive, engaged 
neighborhoods are the crime prevention tools of the 21st century. In the next twenty 
years, New York City will pursue evidence-driven strategies and sophisticated 
technologies to both prevent crime well before it begins and ensure its criminal justice 
system is increasingly safe, fair, and effective. And we want to make sure that, of those 
populations affected by crime—particularly victims of domestic violence—we can 
provide the support they need when they most need it.

Initiative 1
Reduce crime and unnecessary incarceration

The key to safely reducing the jail population while keeping communities safe is to 
reduce crime well before it begins, which leads to both less crime and fewer people 
behind bars. To reduce crime and unnecessary incarceration, the City will 
implement a set of interlocking strategies to help ensure we are reducing crime in 
the most targeted way and using jails and programming wisely and effectively.

150

nyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Supporting Initiatives
A. Use advanced technology and integrated data 

to accurately and effectively reduce crime

The cornerstone of the City’s crime reduction 
efforts is ensuring officers are able, in real time, to 
assess the risks and needs of individuals they 
encounter on the street, so they can effectively and 
accurately exercise discretion. This initiative will 
require both sophisticated mobile technology to 
access data as well as quality, reliable data.

The City is already working to put in the hands of 
every police officer and in every police car a tablet, 
phablet, or smartphone that can serve as a primary 
information source. Access to real-time 
information will allow them, while they are out on 
the beat, to both identify frequent offenders and 
deliver instantaneous information about crimes 
and other critical missions. For example, the City 
has already invested in ShotSpotter technology, a 
gunshot detection tool that triangulates the 
location of a gunshot to within 25 meters of where 
the shot was fired. Making this information 
immediately available on mobile devices will allow 
officers to deploy to a specific location instead of a 
general area, saving resources and increasing the 
chances that shooters will be caught.

This technology will also allow the police to 
become better informed when they exercise their 
discretion so that, consistent with public safety, 
officers know when to make an arrest or issue 
summonses. And finally, technology will give them 
better access to information about programming, 
so they can more effectively match individuals to 
services.

To enhance the quality of data available to first 
responders, the City is building an integrated data 
platform, described in the Integrated Government 
& Social Services goal, that will help facilitate the 
cross-agency coordination of programs and 
services to accurately match individuals to the 
right intervention. The goal is for this integrated 

151

Red Hook Community Justice 
Center in Brooklyn

Major felony crime
Incidents, 1999–2014

200,000

150,000

100,000

50,000

0

PMMR 2015

46% Decline

6
0
1
,
2
0
2

9
9
9
1

1
8
1
,
7
8
1

0
0
0
2

6
4
6
,
2
7
1

9
5
5
,
6
5
1

9
6
6
,
7
4
1

8
6
2
,
3
4
1

1
9
4
,
6
3
1

1
0
0
2

2
0
0
2

3
0
0
2

4
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

3
9
0
,
0
3
1

6
0
0
2

6
3
1
,
3
2
1

8
0
0
2

2
5
0
,
9
1
1

9
0
0
2

8
2
8
,
0
1
1

0
1
0
2

2
0
7
,
5
0
1

1
1
0
2

6
9
4
,
5
0
1

2
1
0
2

9
9
0
,
0
1
1

3
1
0
2

3
2
0
,
0
1
1

4
1
0
2

Average daily jail population
of inmates in city jails
Number of inmates, 1999–2014

16,000

14,000

12,000

10,000

8,000

6,000

4,000

2,000

0

PMMR 2015

35% Decline

2
6
5

,

7
1

9
9
9
1

0
3
5

,

5
1

0
0
0
2

4
3
9

,

3
1

1
0
0
2

4
4
5

,

4
1

2
0
0
2

1
5
7

,

3
1

3
0
0
2

6
7
5

,

3
1

4
0
0
2

7
9
4

,

3
1

5
0
0
2

7
8
9

,

3
1

6
0
0
2

0
5
8

,

3
1

8
0
0
2

2
6
3

,

3
1

9
0
0
2

9
4
0

,

3
1

0
1
0
2

0
9
7

,

2
1

1
1
0
2

7
8
2

,

2
1

2
1
0
2

7
2
8

,

1
1

3
1
0
2

8
0
4

,

1
1

4
1
0
2

Criminal Justice Reformnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City platform to connect City agencies, District Attorneys, defenders, courts, and 
providers to ensure all agencies that touch the population involved with the 
criminal justice system have data and analytics to drive wise decision-making, to 
reduce both crime and unnecessary incarceration.

B. Reduce crime through changes to criminal justice facilities that will 

promote concepts of fairness and confidence in the law

We will conduct an infrastructure survey of probation, police, and court facilities to 
ensure signage and physical design inform individuals of what to expect from the 
criminal justice process, provide the ability to voice concerns, and promote better 
interaction among the players in the justice system. For example, we will introduce 
waiting rooms that can separate victims from their alleged attackers, visiting rooms 
that can permit defendants and lawyers to consult meaningfully, and clear access 
that would permit corrections officers to escort inmates to court in a timely fashion.

C. Enable crime prevention through environmental design

Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) is an approach to 
deterring criminal behavior by altering the physical design of neighborhoods. 
Evidence-driven tactics range from the strategic use of parks and public spaces to 
designing apartment buildings to maximize the number of residents who can 
easily monitor their streets. To promote public safety in high-crime 
neighborhoods, New York City will implement CPTED surveys to develop plans 
for low- and no-cost changes to buildings, parks, and other features of the built 
environment that could reduce crime.

D. Reduce incarceration by examining risk, needs, programming, 
and system flow

An effective criminal justice system should have the ability to assess 
the level of risk at key system points. We will implement citywide 
risk-assessment instruments at arraignment and implement risk-
classification and needs assessments within incarcerative settings.

We will provide effective programming during incarceration and 
appropriate services in the community. Physical space in detention 
and placement/jails for juveniles and adults will accommodate 
cost-effective programming to reduce re-offending. We will ensure 
supportive housing for “frequent flyers,” those who repeatedly 
cycle through the criminal justice system.

We will also design incarceration and justice system spaces to affect 
behavior and resolve system bottlenecks.

152

Officer on a T3 transporter

Criminal Justice Reformnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 2
Build sustained neighborhood engagement to employ 
fairness as a crime reduction tool

Smart reforms have made New York City the safest big city in the country. However, 
crime and violence disproportionately affect the city’s poorest neighborhoods, 
where confidence in government is low.

People are more likely to obey the law when they believe those who are enforcing it 
have the legitimate authority to do so. The public confers legitimacy on those in 
positions of authority who treat them with dignity and respect, give them a voice 
(even if that voice does not carry the day), make decisions that are neutral and fair, 
and convey their motives as trustworthy. The social cohesion of neighborhoods is 
associated with lower crime rates. To translate these well-founded theories into 
actionable steps that will reduce crime, the City will implement the following 
initiatives.

Supporting Initiatives
A. Create neighborhood CompStats with residents and City agencies in high-

distress neighborhoods

CompStat, short for COMPlaint STATistics, are the initials given to New York 
Police Department’s (NYPD) data-driven management tool and are now 
internationally known as a label for an accountability mechanism. In the 
neighborhoods in which distress is clustered, the City will create a regular 
CompStat to identify and solve problems with neighborhood residents. These 
CompStats will be supported by data and measured through key metrics. This 
data support will include the building of neighborhood-justice mapping centers 
that will engage residents and promote cohesion through joint action.

B. Implement a regular citywide method of surveying resident engagement

The City will create a survey system to gauge residents’ feelings about their 
communities. It will be operated online, where ease of use and other incentives 
will encourage residents to respond to periodic questions about neighborhood 
satisfaction and cohesion. This information will enable the City to track changes 
in attitudes and raise resident confidence in government responsiveness.

153

Criminal Justice Reformnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 3
Use criminal justice data-driven strategies to improve 
decision making and reduce crime and unnecessary 
incarceration

Leveraging the citywide integrated data platform, the City will build tools to ensure 
agencies that touch the population affected by criminal justice, inside and outside of 
Mayoral control, have data and analytics to drive wise decision making to reduce 
both crime and unnecessary incarceration. A range of analytic and data strategies 
designed to assess decision making at critical points throughout the spectrum of 
criminal-justice processes will support this goal.

Supporting Initiatives
A. Introduce strategic tools for health and neighborhood safety

Strong communities, with robust networks of programs and services, lay the 
groundwork for enduring safety. We will work to make neighborhoods safe 
through a set of strategies designed to support crime prevention and reduce 
conditions in some of the city’s most distressed neighborhoods.

To prevent crime, the City will also build a set of strategic tools designed to 
support people with behavioral health needs in chronic care treatment. These 
tools will help prevent an individual’s contact with the criminal justice system.

B. Build crime-and-incarceration reduction strategic tools

Once an individual is in the justice system, the City will build analytic tools to 
ensure fair and appropriate decision making throughout the deploy system. This 
will include strategies to reduce case processing times, improved matching of 
candidates to diversion programs, alternatives to detention and incarceration 
programs, pre-arraignment and pre-trial screening, and reduced warrants through, 
among other things, reminder systems for summons appearances.

Initiative 4
Ensure all victims of domestic violence have access to a 
shelter and necessary services

Domestic violence accounts for a significant percentage of the crime that occurs in 
New York City. In 2014, 40 percent of all felony assaults and 36 percent of all rapes 
were related to domestic violence. That same year, domestic violence accounted 
for 19 percent of murders. In total, the NYPD responded to 282,648 domestic 
violence incidents.

154

Criminal Justice Reformnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City In addition to reducing crime and lowering incarceration, we also aim to provide 
services to victims of crime, so they can recover and re-participate fully in the city. 
While the City provides many services for victims of domestic violence, too many 
domestic violence victims still lack access to the services they need when they need 
them. The moment of exit from an abusive relationship is one of the most dangerous 
times for victims. In 2014, over 4,100 adults and children who needed emergency 
domestic violence shelter were not linked to one, with only 35 percent of single 
adults linked to a shelter in comparison with 52 percent overall.

The City must address the need for additional shelter space for any member of a 
vulnerable population subject to the threat of domestic violence: single adults, 
members of the LGBTQ community, sex-trafficking victims, and others. 
Accommodations including longer-term shelter beds must be made for victims with 
children. Placement in domestic violence shelters is limited to 180 days, and 
therefore, in the implementation of the City’s housing plan, the City will implement 
a sustainable plan for domestic violence victims to transition from shelters to 
permanent housing.

In key neighborhoods where domestic violence occurs more frequently, the City will 
build upon the community-based Family Justice Center model and expand into new 
neighborhoods. These centers will be able to provide comprehensive multi-agency 
services for domestic-violence victims, close to their homes.

Crime related to domestic violence
Number of incidents

Murder

Felonious assult

S
T
N
E
D

I

C
N

I

 

F
O

 

R
E
B
M
U
N

10,000

5,000

85

68

75

71

56

0

4,777

FY10

5,870

FY11

6,781

FY12

7,420

FY13

8,335

FY14

PMMR 2015

100

50

0

155

Criminal Justice Reformnyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City INDICATORS + TARGETS

 Reduce the number of  
traffic fatalities to zero

 Reduce the number of  
serious injuries due to  
traffic collisions to zero

Vision Zero

Goal: New Yorkers will continue to embrace 
Vision Zero and accept no traffic fatalities on 
New York City streets

Overview
Traffic fatalities in the city have fallen significantly—from 701 in 1990 to 381 in 2000, to 
an all-time low of 249 in 2011—and New York is internationally recognized as a leading 
innovator in safe street design. However, approximately 4,000 New Yorkers are still 
seriously injured and more than 250 killed in traffic crashes each year. Vulnerable 
populations are the most affected—being struck by a vehicle is the leading cause of 
injury-related death for children under 14, and the second-leading cause for seniors, 
who comprise 12 percent of the population but 33 percent of pedestrian fatalities.

In January 2014, the Mayor launched Vision Zero, a bold commitment to improving 
street safety in every neighborhood.

Vision Zero contains a robust portfolio of initiatives to make our streets safer, 
including expanded enforcement against dangerous moving violations such as 
speeding and failing to yield to pedestrians; new street designs and configurations to 
improve safety; broad public outreach and education; and a sweeping legislative 
agenda to deter dangerous driving. These projects include fifty street-improvement 
projects to reengineer intersections and corridors, speed cameras to reduce 
speeding in school zones, and upgrades to City fleet vehicles to monitor speeding 
and other dangerous driving behaviors. Together, these comprehensive initiatives 
are giving New York City control over the safety of our streets.

Vision Zero is already having an impact. 2014 was the safest year in New York’s 
history for pedestrians and one of the safest years for all New Yorkers since record 
keeping began in 1910. In 2013, 182 pedestrians lost their lives in traffic crashes, 
while in 2014, only 138 pedestrians were fatally injured. Despite this significant 
progress, the City recognizes there is more work to be done—and we are committed 
to a new set of initiatives to continue this work.

Pedestrian traffic fatalities, 1984-2014

305

1984

246

1994

155

 2004

138

 2014

156

nyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Vision Zero pedestrian safety
priority map, 2009-2013

Department of Transportation

Priority Areas

Priority Intersections

Priority Corridors

Highways

Major Streets

157

Vision Zeronyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Pedestrian  
traffic fatalities 
2009-2013

Queens Boulevard  
55 pedestrians killed or 
seriously injured  

4th Avenue  
60 pedestrians killed or 
seriously injured 

Atlantic Avenue  
64 pedestrians killed or 
seriously injured 

Grand Concourse  
70 pedestrians killed or 
seriously injured 

Vision Zero effort on  
Eastern Parkway

Initiative 1
Continue implementation of the Vision Zero Action Plan

The City will continue to execute and build on the portfolio of initiatives developed 
in the 2014 Action Plan, focusing on pedestrian safety, bicycle access, truck safety, 
and improvements to priority areas citywide.

Bike lanes are a fundamental aspect of the Vision Zero strategy to increase safety. 
Well-designed bike facilities protect bicyclists, reduce excessive speeding, organize 
traffic flow, and shorten crossing distances for pedestrians. And when bicycling feels 
safer, people are more likely to choose it as a transportation option. Therefore, the 
Department of Transportation (DOT) will work closely with communities around 
the city to expand a bicycle network that improves safety for all road users, 
including installing at least five miles of protected bicycle lanes annually. This 
supports our efforts to develop a multi-modal transportation system, further laid out 
in Vision 3.

Turning trucks pose a significant safety risk to pedestrians in crosswalks, so the City 
will launch a pilot program to test the effectiveness of truck side guards. Side guards 
are protective additions to vehicles that reduce the likelihood that pedestrians and 
cyclists will suffer severe injuries when struck by a turning truck. Department of 
Citywide Administrative Services (DCAS) will install truck side guards in more than 
200 units within the City fleet—the largest side-guard program in the nation. If the 
initial rollout is a success, every new City truck will be designed to include them.

Initiative 2
Use Borough Pedestrian Safety Action Plans to guide 
future engineering projects and enforcement priorities

In an effort to drive down traffic fatalities, DOT and NYPD developed a set of five 
plans, each of which analyzes the unique conditions of one New York City borough 
and recommends actions to address the borough’s specific challenges to pedestrian 
safety. Each Borough Plan was shaped by a comprehensive community outreach 
process that included 28 workshops and 10,000 comments to the Vision Zero input 
map. Community input was combined with cutting-edge crash-data analysis and 
used to identify the predominant traffic safety issues at priority corridors, 
intersections, and areas of the city—the most crash-prone locations. This broad, 
participatory, data-driven process ensures an equitable approach to prioritizing 
safety projects. Each year through 2017, DOT will complete fifty Vision Zero safety 
projects at the priority corridors, intersections, and areas identified in the Borough 
Plans. These improvements will simplify complex intersections, discourage 
excessive vehicle speeds, add bicycle lanes, make pedestrians and cyclists more 
visible, increase accessibility, and shorten pedestrian crossing distances.

158

Vision Zeronyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City To give pedestrians a “head start” while walking across the street and reduce 
conflicts with turning vehicles, DOT will expand exclusive pedestrian crossing time 
on all Priority Corridors by the end of 2017. Leading pedestrian intervals (LPIs) are a 
signal-timing treatment that provides pedestrian-only walk time before vehicles, 
including turning vehicles, receive the green light. They are a proven method of 
reducing pedestrian-vehicle incidents at high-pedestrian crash locations.

Initiative 3
Transform dangerous arterial roads into Vision Zero 
Great Streets

Many of the corridors with the highest rates of fatal and severe-injury pedestrian 
crashes per mile are wide roads that divide our neighborhoods and communities but 
have the potential to serve as connectors—including Queens Boulevard, 4th Avenue in 
Brooklyn, Atlantic Avenue in East New York, and the Grand Concourse in the Bronx.

The Vision Zero Great Streets program will rethink and redesign these major 
corridors in order to prevent serious crashes, enhance mobility, increase 
accessibility, and bolster neighborhood vitality. This comprehensive overhaul 
provides opportunities for improving safety such as shortening of pedestrian 
crossing distances through curb extensions and widened medians, physically 
separated bike lanes, and the addition of amenities such as benches and landscaping.

Great Streets capital projects will be fast-tracked in order to allow a permanent 
build-out of street improvements initially made with temporary materials. Capital 
construction projects are complex and develop over multiple years because of the 
extensive coordination and collaboration between DOT, DDC, and a host of other 
City agencies, utility companies, and the community. Each of these corridors 
presents special challenges because of high pedestrian volumes, heavy car, bus, and 
truck traffic, and the presence of subways underneath the road or elevated 
structures overhead. Under Vision Zero Great Streets, painted medians and 
temporary bollards will be built out in permanent materials faster, and New Yorkers 
will begin to see construction of expanded pedestrian space, beautified medians 
with trees, and physically separated bike paths on major streets by 2017.

159

Residents at Queens Blvd. safety 
workshop in January 2015

Queens Boulevard 
Redesign 
The Vision Zero Great Streets 
funding includes $100 million 
for improving segments of 
Queens Boulevard, a 7.2 mile, 
complex, multi-roadway 
corridor that cuts across more 
than half the borough. The 
long crossing distances, high 
traffic speeds, and highway-like 
urban design have contribut-
ed to historically high crash 
rates. In January 2015, the 
DOT, NYPD, and one hundred 
residents, merchants, and other 
stakeholders participated in 
the first Queens Boulevard 
design workshop to identify 
safety solutions. The direction 
from the community was clear: 
calmed service roads, im-
proved crossings, the addition 
of a protected bike lane, and 
beautification. DOT intends 
to design and implement 
fast-track design solutions this 
year, and simultaneously begin 
planning for the long-term 
capital-funded changes needed 
to permanently remake Queens 
Boulevard’s image.

Vision Zeronyc.gov/onenycVision 2One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Vision 3

Our Sustainable 
City 

New York City will be the most sustainable big 
city in the world and a global leader in the fight 
against climate change 

New York City will…

  Reduce the city’s greenhouse gas 

emissions by 80 percent by 2050 relative to 
2005 levels

  Reduce waste disposal by 90 percent by 

2030 relative to 2005 levels

  Reduce risks of stormwater flooding in 

most affected communities

160

Vision 3nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Goals

80 x 50
New York City’s greenhouse gas emissions will be 80 percent lower by 2050 than in 2005

Zero Waste
New York City will send zero waste to landfills by 2030

Air Quality
New York City will have the best air quality among all large U.S. cities by 2030

Brownfields
New York City will clean up contaminated land to address disproportionately high 
exposures in low-income communities and convert land to safe and beneficial use

Water Management
New York City will mitigate neighborhood flooding and offer high-quality  
water services

Parks & Natural Resources
All New Yorkers will benefit from useful, accessible, and beautiful open spaces

161

Vision 3nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City “Invest even more in the 
public realm. These are 
the common spaces 
where we come together 
as people and as proud 
New Yorkers from all 
over. We need powerful 
public design that 
inspires, sustains, and 
catalyzes community 
vibrancy.” 

–Jeff B., Manhattan

Gowanus Canal

Introduction
Sustainability means the activities we undertake today will not compromise 
the present generation’s or future generations’ ability to meet their own 
needs. It is grounded in the recognition that people, economic development, and the 
environment are interconnected, and for any to thrive, all must thrive together. A 
sustainable city is connected by transportation systems that move people and goods 
to their destinations in a way that is both affordable and minimizes air pollution and 
greenhouse gas emissions. In a sustainable city, the air is breathable and the water 
drinkable. Waterways are clean and healthy food is available in any neighborhood. 
The power system is efficient and dependable, meeting the demands of an 
expanding population without the greenhouse gas emissions that contribute to 
climate change. Buildings provide healthy environments, and are well designed for 
comfort and minimal energy costs. The small amount of solid waste generated is 
recycled, composted, and/or turned into energy without affecting air quality. 
Contaminated land from our industrial history is cleaned up to create housing, 
parks, and opportunities for new jobs. Parks offer spaces for children to play in and 
adults to walk around, trees provide shade and absorb carbon emissions, and are a 
refuge from the clanging and concrete. To become the most sustainable big city in 
the world, we have to be conscientious of the resources we consume and the 
structures we build. We have to innovate, because our density and island status 
create special conditions. And we must remember that what we do now will have 
lasting effects for generations. To become the most sustainable big city, we must 
all do our part today, for the sake of the future. 

Across the globe, greenhouse gas emissions are growing at an unprecedented rate, 
causing a rise in average global temperature and changes to climate patterns. In 
order to limit temperature increases this century to just 2°C and to avert the worst 
effects of climate change, as called for in the United Nation’s Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, we will need a 50 percent reduction in global 
emissions by mid-century—and up to an 80 percent reduction in developed 
countries. New York City has signed on to meet this goal.

Cities must play a leading role in addressing the problem as more than half the 
world’s population now lives in urban areas, with cities generating the majority of 
the world’s emissions. Many cities, especially those concentrated in coastal zones 
that face increasing threats of rising sea levels, have recognized the urgency to act 
now to reduce emissions, regardless of national or regional climate policies. 

We can take pride in the progress made to date toward our sustainability goals. 
In a very short span since the end of the last century, we have already shaped New 
York City to be a model for the 21st century. Our city has its cleanest air in the last 50 
years, and greenhouse gas emissions have dropped 19 percent from 2005 levels. We 
are but a few plantings away from the goal of a million new trees. Over 475 
brownfield properties are being cleaned up and readied for new development, which 
is expected to bring 3,850 units of affordable housing. Our harbor is now the cleanest 

162

Vision 3nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City “The city needs to work 
on ways to get businesses 
to use clean energy and to 
clean up the air and 
water... The city should 
also look at incentivizing 
building owners to build 
green and maintain green 
roofs, and find ways to 
cut down on using energy 
that comes from non-
renewable sources.” 

–Michael G., Bronx

it has been in the last century. More than 500 miles of sewers have been constructed, 
or rebuilt, and we are activating a third city water tunnel to provide critical 
infrastructure redundancy to our water supply and the opportunity to repair older 
tunnels. Much of this work has stemmed from the emphasis on sustainability 
embedded in past PlaNYCs, and was enhanced by the initiatives developed since 
2014. New York City has firmly established itself among the community of global 
urban leaders in sustainability. We share this leadership with the most progressive 
capitals of commerce and culture in the world, but there remains much more to be 
done if we are to stake our claim as the most sustainable big city in the world.

As New York City continues to grow, meeting sustainability objectives will become 
more challenging. We are consuming more goods and resources, and consequently 
risk generating more waste and pollution. Our businesses and lifestyles, the engines 
of our economy and the products of our creativity, also require increasing amounts 
of energy, most of which is still derived from carbon-intensive fossil fuels. 
Continuing combustion of fossil fuels compromises our air quality goals—adversely 
affecting vulnerable populations and neighborhoods—and our ability to reduce our 
emission of greenhouse gases that result in global climate change. New sites to 
develop are becoming increasingly scarce, and the basic services needed to support a 
city, from water to power to sanitation to transportation, are becoming increasingly 
strained under the weight of a growing population and aging infrastructure. We 
must figure out how all New Yorkers can sustainably and affordably live in clean, 
healthy environments. In building on the good work of our predecessors, we must 
enlarge the scale of our efforts to match the boldness of our ambitions.

Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge

Materials Recovery Facility at 
South Brooklyn Marine Terminal

Solar panels at the Port Richmond 
Waste Water Treatment Plant

163

Vision 3nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Environmental Justice

 
We recognize that equity and environmental conditions are inexorably linked.  
Environmental hazards translate into poor health, loss of wages, and dimin-
ished quality of life, particularly for residents of low-income communities that 
have historically been burdened with a disproportionate share of environmen-
tal risk. 

OneNYC addresses the sources of disparities in health outcomes such as asth-
ma and cardiovascular disease, as well as the environmental impediments to 
economic opportunity and neighborhood stability. It calls for a more equitable 
and targeted approach to a broad variety of City services, such as solid waste 
and stormwater management, tending our open spaces, and environmental 
remediation. Through OneNYC, we are committed to:

•  Improving air quality in vulnerable communities through reduced and 

diverted truck trips resulting from implementation of Zero Waste, increased 
barging of waste under the Solid Waste Management Plan, and a freight 
strategy to shift the movement of goods to rail and water transport. Air pol-
lutant emissions will also be reduced through the accelerated conversions of 
boilers in buildings and the targeted expansion of mass transit and pedestri-
an and bicycle networks. (Visions 1 and 3)

•  Addressing indoor health hazards in homes through initiatives such as New 

York City Housing Authority (NYCHA) mold remediation. (Vision 2)

•  Improving parks that have received little capital investment and are located 

in areas of high need, based on higher-than-average poverty, density, and 
population growth. (Vision 3)

•  Advancing an aggressive and participatory brownfields redevelopment 

program that protects human health for those living in close proximity while 
creating new opportunities for affordable housing development and job 
creation.  (Vision 3)

•  Reducing flooding in Southeast Queens and other highly affected neigh-

borhoods through a combination of grey and green infrastructure as well as 
other water management services. (Vision 3)

•  Developing new mentorship and job training programs to ensure that the 
city’s workforce benefits from and contributes to the City’s efforts to miti-
gate climate change and build a more resilient city. (Vision 1)

Finally, it is imperative that we empower communities through public dissem-
ination of data  
and the creation of venues for participatory planning. We need the help of 
community stakeholders to identify at-risk populations, toxic “hot spots,” 
research gaps, and effective implementation strategies. Only through the joint 
deployment of scientific expertise and local knowledge will we achieve clean, 
healthy, livable, and sustainable communities across the city.

164

Vision 3nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Neighborhood Spotlight

In the Bronx River Corridor, investments in zero waste initiatives, 
improvements to local parks, cleanup of brownfields, and upgrading of 
critical infrastructure will ensure the sustainability of this neighborhood 
for generations to come.

A

A

B

Bronx River Houses 
Pilot NYCHA recycling outreach 
program will reduce the neighbor-
hood’s waste output and contrib-
ute to achieving Zero Waste

Lyons Square Playground 
Quality and amenities of park will 
be improved through Community 
Parks Initiative

C

D

NYC Voluntary  
Cleanup Program Site 
Conversion from a contaminated 
gas station site to a commercial 
building will generate local jobs.

BRONX RIVER

Hunts Point Wastewater  
Treatment Plant 
Replacement of waste processing 
infrastructure will unlock poten-
tial for future renewable energy 
generation to power plant and 
adjacent Food Distribution Center.

B

C

D

EAST RIVER

SOUNDVIEWPARKCROTONAPARKBRONXPARK652SHERIDAN EXPYCROSS-BRONX EXPYBRUCKNER EXPYBRONX RIVER PKWY180TH STTREMONT AVEBRONXRIVERHOUSESCROTONAPARK EASTHUNTS POINTLONGWOODPARKCHESTERWESTFARMSSHERIDAN EXPYCROSS-BRONX EXPYBRUCKNER EXPYBRONX RIVER PKWY180TH STTREMONT AVEINDICATORS + TARGETS

 Reduce the city’s green-
house gas emissions by  
80% by 2050 relative to 
2005 levels

80 x 50

Goal: The New York City’s greenhouse gas 
emissions will be 80 percent lower by 2050 than 
in 2005

Overview
Climate change is an existential threat to humanity. New York City, a city built primarily on 
islands and with 520 miles of shoreline, is particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate 
change in a number of ways. Rising sea levels, extreme storms, and heat waves are a few of the 
perils it faces. To combat these threats, the City is employing two strategies. First, we must 
reduce our own greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and second, we must adapt so that our 
neighborhoods, economy, and public services are ready to withstand, and emerge stronger 
from, the impacts of climate change. Here, we discuss how we will approach the first strategy: 
the reduction of our own emissions. The second strategy is addressed under Vision 4.

In September 2014, New York City committed to the goal of achieving an 80 percent 
reduction in GHG emissions from 2005 levels by 2050 (80 x 50). The city’s emissions 
have already dropped 19 percent, nearly two-thirds of the way toward an intermediary 
goal of reducing GHG emissions 30 percent by 2030. The majority of the GHG 
reductions achieved to date were the result of replacing coal and oil with natural gas for 
electricity generation, as well as other improvements to utility operations. These specific 
strategies cannot be replicated, and future reductions will be more challenging.

Every year, the City undertakes an inventory to monitor citywide GHG emissions. 
Nearly three-quarters of New York City’s GHG emissions are attributable to energy used 
in our buildings and how they are operated. Vehicles and emissions from decomposing 
solid waste make up the balance. By contrast, the national average has a far larger 
proportion attributable to vehicles. As a result, the City’s focus to-date has been on 
buildings and energy efficiency—and we are committed to leading the way.

However, the entire burden of reducing GHG emissions cannot be borne only by the owners 
and occupants of our buildings. The power they are receiving should be less carbon-
intensive. Significant emissions reductions have already been achieved by increasing the 
share of natural gas in the city’s power mix. Nuclear power, which emits minimal GHGs, is 
also a large part of the city’s energy portfolio, representing 30 percent of the city’s power 
supply. Subtracting nuclear energy from our supply would raise issues of sourcing 
alternatives low-carbon energy, reliability, and cost. Beyond that, only a small fraction of the 
power the city receives comes from renewable sources of energy. Fragmented approval 
chains combined with limited knowledge about available resources and grid infrastructure 
stymie promising alternatives, such as geothermal and solar installations. Power regulators 
and others are looking at what a carbon-minimal future requires and what we need to do to 
get there, recognizing the difficulties of the status quo, including costs. Offshore wind, 
microgrids, and distributed energy generation can work here as they do in other cities, but 

166

nyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City the roadblocks need to be removed. Renewable energy sources must account for a 
significant proportion of the city’s energy mix.

To reach 80 x 50, over 43 million metric tons of carbon dioxide-equivalent (CO2e) emissions 
reductions relative to business-as-usual trends will need to come from cleaner power 
generation, fossil-fuel-free modes of transportation, reducing solid waste, as well as 
improvements to the energy efficiency of buildings across New York City. By 2050, we must 
reduce nine million metric tons from power production, seven million metric tons from 
personal and commercial vehicles, two million metric tons from the disposal of solid waste, 
and the remaining 25 million metric tons from energy used in buildings. These numbers are 
the current estimated thresholds necessary to meet 80 x 50, but may change over time with 
technological advances, increased resources, and other factors. 

Focusing on all four key sectors—buildings, power, transportation, and solid waste—
will get us to 80 x 50.  We will continue implementing existing GHG-reduction initiatives 
identified in former PlaNYCs, and in One City: Built to Last, the City’s blueprint to address 
emissions from the building sector.

New York City will substantially reduce emissions from electricity generation, 
transportation, and solid-waste management by 2025. The initiatives announced in this 
plan are a down payment on our efforts to dramatically reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
In the next year, the City will develop a 2025 action plan of additional initiatives for each of 
these three sectors to set our power, transportation, and solid waste systems on a path to 
80 x 50.

Pathway for reductions in citywide 
greenhouse gas emissions 
to 80 x 50

Source: NYC MOS

167

80 x 50nyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City CANNONSVILLE  
RESERVOIR HYDRO- 
ELECTRIC FACILITY 
The New York City Department 
of Environmental Protection 
(DEP) will develop a new hy-
droelectric facility at the City’s 
Cannonsville Reservoir, located in 
Delaware County. The 14-mega-
watt facility will advance New 
York City’s goal of developing 
affordable, clean, and renewable 
energy supplies that support 
economic growth, while reducing 
the city’s overall carbon footprint. 
By capturing the natural force of 
the millions of gallons of water 
released from Cannonsville Res-
ervoir each year, the hydroelectric 
facility will generate enough 
electricity to power roughly 
6,000 homes while avoiding the 
emission of 25,620 metric tons of 
greenhouse gases each year—the 
equivalent of carbon sequestered 
by 21,000 acres of U.S. forests 
in one year. The Federal Energy 
Regulatory Commission recently 
issued a license to DEP to build a 
hydroelectric facility at Cannons-
ville Reservoir.  The facility will be 
comprised of four hydroelectric 
turbines generating an estimated 
42,280 megawatt hours of elec-
tricity each year, situated inside 
a 9,000 square foot powerhouse.  
Constructing and operating the 
facility will also have a positive 
impact in the Delaware water-
shed that surrounds Cannonsville 
Reservoir, creating approximately 
60 construction jobs and as many 
as five full-time green jobs for 
those who will operate the plant. 
The facility will help hold down 
electricity costs upstate and 
displace an equivalent amount 
of generation from higher-cost, 
fossil-fuel-fired sources. Such 
displacement not only reduces 
the emission of pollutants from 
burning fossil fuels, but also tends 
to reduce the overall wholesale 
market price of energy. 

Initiative 1
Develop near-term local actions and long-term regional 
strategies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the 
power sector 

The power sector has become significantly cleaner in recent years, but a 
fundamental reconfiguration is required to achieve a deep reduction in GHG 
emissions and move toward the 80 x 50 goal. 

While a low carbon power sector is technically feasible, many hurdles remain. Much 
of our current energy supply and the barriers to cleaner generation lie beyond the 
geographic boundaries of the city. Therefore, our 80 x 50 plan will be based on a 
regional strategy. We will partner with other municipalities, utilities, transmission 
owners, generators, and energy services companies, as well as State and Federal 
regulators, in order to achieve significant GHG reductions.

Supporting Initiatives
A. Remove barriers to more efficient power generation and increased 

renewable power production

In-city power generation facilities are aging—76 percent of the facilities are over 40 years 
old. Replacing older generators represents a significant opportunity to increase efficiency, 
reduce GHG emissions, improve air quality, and maintain high levels of reliability and 
resiliency. However, current market rules do not value such externalities. We must work 
with the New York Independent System Operator (NYISO, manager of the bulk power 
system), regulators, and suppliers to change the market rules to value these benefits and 
provide incentives for newer, cleaner generators. The City will work with other market 
participants, NYISO, and State and Federal regulators to eliminate the barriers to entry 
that now exist.

B. Support the development of renewable power resources

Currently, most renewable resources require financial assistance to address high 
upfront costs. Such funding is available at the state level. For example, it is estimated 
that the Renewable Portfolio Standard, administered by the New York State Energy 
Research and Development Authority, could have an economic potential to support 
3,348 megawatts (MW) of new renewable generation by 2020, and 15,594 MW by 2030. 
If this potential is realized, the state would achieve annual GHG reductions of 2.33 
million metric tons by 2020, and 13.51 million metric tons by 2030. Funding is also 
available through the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, which sets a regional carbon 
dioxide (CO2) cap for the power sector and sells CO2 allowances to power generation 
facilities in participating states. The revenue is used to support cleaner fuel, renewable 
energy, and energy efficiency-related initiatives. RGGI funds have been used to invest in 
new equipment that will generate approximately 7.3 million fewer metric tons of CO2 
over the its useful life. We must work with the State to ensure these and future funds are 
fully used to support renewable and energy efficiency programs. 

168

80 x 50nyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City NEW YORK STATE PUBLIC SERVICE  
COMMISSION REFORMING THE ENERGY  
VISION PROCESS

Over the past two decades, the technology used to produce 
and provide electricity to customers has changed signifigant-
ly.  We are at the beginning of a new era with more power 
options for customers than ever before. The New York State 
Public Service Commission is at the forefront of develop-
ing the regulatory paradigm for the future of the electric 
power industry through the Reforming the Energy Vision 
(REV) initiative. REV aims to reorient both the electric 
power industry and the utility ratemaking paradigm toward 
a consumer-centered approach that harnesses technology 
and markets. The process promotes efficient use of energy; 
deeper market penetration of renewable energy resources; 
wider deployment of distributed energy resources such as 
micro-grids, on-site power supplies, and storage; and the use 
of advanced energy management products. We are actively 
participating in REV through filings and committees. 

C. Increase the share of wind power in the City’s power mix 

  Wind power is a well-established renewable power technology 

but it only represents a small fraction of the City’s mix. The 
City will work to increase the amount of wind power supplied 
from the region. It will also work closely with key stakeholders 
to enhance the viability of large-scale wind projects by 
increasing demand, lowering costs to meet market electricity 
prices, and advocating for financial assistance. Key efforts 
include developing a regional commitment to a pipeline of 
projects to develop economies of scale and attract more 
interest from developers; ensuring wind power will be sold 
under long-term contracts, and working with regulators to 
change market entry rules to reduce risks and financing costs; 
identifying port facilities and other locations for assembly and 
construction staging sites; assessing the availability of 
interconnection points; and adopting local zoning or other 
means to streamline and support these projects.

Electricity Delivery System

Conventional Power 
Generation

Area
Substation

Natural Gas
Nuclear
Fuel Oil

Transmission

Transmission

Utility Scale 
Renewables

Wind Power

The bulk of New York City’s power comes from 
large conventional power plants running on 
natural gas, nuclear power, or fuel oil. However 
to achieve 80 x 50 the City will need to increase 
its reliance on utility scale renewable power 
sources.

Power produced in large, centralized plants is 
transmitted through high voltage transmission 
lines. To ensure smooth integration of a grow-
ing share of renewable energy, the transmis-
sion system must be maintained and enhanced. 
Substations convert electricity to lower voltage 
before distribution to consumers. 

Distributed generation, such as from com-
bined heat and power (CHP) or solar installa-
tions, also plays an important role in reducing 
GHG emissions. These are located closer to 
customers thereby reducing transmission and 
distribution losses.

Finally, by increasing the use of smart grid 
technologies, such as automated demand 
response and smart meters, consumers can 
reduce both peak and total demand.

Distribution 
Network

Underground and
Overhead

Apartment House

CHP

Solar  
Panel

School

Solar  
Panel

CHP

Hospital

Solar  
Panel

Residential and Light 
Commercial Customers

Commercial

CHP

Financial

Consumers

169

80 x 50nyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City D. Adopt smart grid technologies and reduce transmission bottlenecks

Bottlenecks in the transmission system from energy generated in western and northern 
New York to the east and south to the lower Hudson Valley and New York City restrict 
the ability of the city to rely on renewable energy generated in other parts of the state. 
The City will work with its neighbors and State agencies to develop solutions to 
transmission bottlenecks through transmission modernization, new facilities, and smart 
transmission technology. 

Smart grid technologies can also enable greater integration of distributed generation 
technologies and allows consumers to better manage consumption, helping to reduce 
both peak and total energy loads. The City supports the development of a comprehensive 
strategy to deploy smart grid technologies. This is consistent with the New York State 
Public Service Commission’s efforts to develop a new vision for the region’s power grid. 

E. Expand decentralized power production 

Decentralized and district-scale clean energy also have a role to play in meeting our 80 x 
50 goal. On-site power generation across a network of decentralized systems, such as CHP 
systems and community-shared solar photovoltaic (PV) systems can reduce losses 
associated with transmission and distribution, increase efficiency, and enable a more 
resilient power system. Through One City: Built to Last, the City committed to supporting 
community-shared solar PV projects. These installations would use net-metering to bring 
solar power to new neighborhoods and allow homes and businesses to feed unused 
energy back into the grid.

Additionally, the City will leverage direct capital investment, power purchase agreements, 
and emergent solar deployment models to attain the most cost-effective and comprehensive 
clean energy strategy. As the market develops and available incentives for solar and clean 
energy shift, the City will adjust its approach to assess and pursue the most desirable 
pathways to increasing cost-effective low carbon energy throughout its operations.

F. Achieve net-zero energy at in-city wastewater treatment plants by 2050

Emissions from the water and wastewater system are responsible for nearly 20 percent of 
City government emissions and wastewater treatment accounts for 90 percent of that. 
The City will work to dramatically reduce these emissions with an aim of net-zero energy 
consumption at in-city wastewater treatment plants by 2050. Improving the efficiency of 
wastewater treatment, increasing the production of biogas, and capturing and beneficially 
using all biogas as a renewable energy source will significantly reduce carbon emissions 
associated with flaring, as well as offset emissions from energy generated from traditional 
fossil-fuel sources. Over the next decade, the City will achieve further reductions in energy 
consumption across all of the wastewater treatment plants by decreasing demand, 
increasing on-site power generation, recovering and reusing biogas, and undertaking 
co-digestion of organic wastes.

North River Wastewater  
Treatment Plant Combined  
Heat and Power Facility

DECENTRALIZED  
ENERGY IN LONDON 

Decentralized Energy (DE) 
is a core component of the 
London’s Climate Change Mit-
igation and Energy Strategy to 
reduce carbon emissions. Like 
New York City, London is com-
mitted to reducing emissions 
by 80 percent by 2050. London 
defines decentralized energy as 
the local generation of electric-
ity and the recovery of surplus 
heat for such purposes as build-
ing space heating and domestic 
hot water production. 

London’s goal is to use DE to 
develop a more sustainable, 
secure, and cost-effective 
energy supply, with a target of 
delivering a quarter of London’s 
energy through DE by 2025. 
This commitment emerged 
from a decentralized energy 
master-planning exercise across 
London. The target will be 
met through a combination of 
energy-efficiency measures, 
micro-generation renewable 
energy systems, and the use of 
CHP linked to heat networks. 
Heat generated as a by-product 
of electricity generation will be 
pumped into buildings, either 
as hot water or steam. Biomass 
is also a potential energy source. 

170

80 x 50nyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Cogeneration at In-City Wastewater 
Treatment Plants

North River

Design is underway to install a 12 megawatt cogene-
ration system at the North River Wastewater Treat-
ment Plant. This CHP system will use digester gas, 
produced on site, as well as supplemental natural gas 
to generate electricity that will meet the plant’s base 
electrical demand, while recovering enough heat 
for the plant’s heating needs. This project will offset 
the use of 90 percent of utility electricity and over 
1.7 million gallons of fuel oil and double the amount 
of digester gas used. This will improve air quality, 
reduce carbon emissions by approximately 10,000 
metric tons of CO2e per year, and reduce energy bills.

CHP is a good fit for a facility such as the North River 
Wastewater Treatment Plant because it operates 24 
hours a day and continuously needs electricity and 
heat. Wastewater treatment plants produce digester 
gas as part of the treatment process, which is made 
up of 60 percent methane, and can be used as a 
renewable energy source for the CHP system. Fur-
thermore, CHP systems offer electric reliability and 
resiliency benefits by being able to produce energy 
on-site and “self-power” in the event of an electrical 
grid disruption.

Wards Island

Wards Island Wastewater Treatment Plant was built in 
1937. It is the second largest of the 14 WWTPs located 
across the city. The plant serves a population of over 
one million people and a drainage area of over 12,000 
acres, which includes the western portion of the Bronx 
and the Upper East Side of Manhattan. The WWTP has 
an average load of just under 12 MW and consumes ap-
proximately 100 million kilowatt hours (kWh) a year—
the equivalent of approximately 12,450 homes. In addi-
tion, in order to meet the WWTP’s thermal demand, it 
consumes about 30,000 million British Thermal Units 
(MMBTU) of fuel oil each year and 168,000 MMBTU 
of digester gas—combined, the equivalent of heating 
approximately 1,650 homes.

Because of the relatively constant power and thermal 
requirements necessary to operate the WWTP, and 
the need for a new heating system and backup power, 

cogeneration offers a tremendous opportunity to 
meet all of these needs with a single solution. It 
is estimated that a cogeneration system fueled by 
digester and natural gas will reduce GHG emissions 
by almost 37,000 metric tons per year. This reduc-
tion represents a 68 percent reduction in the plant’s 
carbon footprint—the equivalent of removing near-
ly 7,600 passenger vehicles from the road. Using 
digester gas produced at the WWTP as the primary 
fuel source and recapturing the waste heat as part 
of the cogeneration system is estimated to save $3.4 
million per year. 

Hunts Point

Built in 1952, the Hunts Point Wastewater Treatment 
Plant is located in a section of the Bronx adjacent to 
the Hunts Point Terminal Produce Market Center—
the largest food distribution system in the world. The 
plant services a population of over 680,000 people 
across 16,660 acres in the eastern section of the Bronx. 
It has an average load of eight MW and consumes 
approximately 70 million kWh per year—the equiv-
alent of powering approximately 8,700 homes. For 
its heating needs, Hunts Point uses approximately 
169,300 MMBTUs of fuel oil, natural gas, and digester 
gas—the equivalent of heating approximately 1,400 
homes a year.

The replacement of the plant’s digesters along with 
possible future cogeneration would produce over 
70,000 MWh per year (enough to power 8,700 
homes), yield cost savings of $3 million per year, and 
reduce carbon emissions by 11,400 metric tons, per 
year – the equivalent of removing 2,300 passenger 
cars from the road. By providing digester capacity 
to accept high strength feedstocks (e.g., food waste), 
additional higher quality digester gas would be 
produced.  This could allow the WWTP to meet all 
of its energy needs and potentially become net en-
ergy-positive, allowing excess energy to be supplied 
back to the Food Distribution Center.  
This would offset the need to purchase fossil  
fuel-generated energy, divert waste from landfills,  
and reduce long-haul trucking, thereby multiplying 
the environmental benefits associated with reducing 
GHG and criteria pollutant emissions.

171

80 x 50nyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 2
Develop a mode shift action plan to reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions from the transportation sector

New Yorkers produce fewer greenhouse gas emissions to get around than citizens of 
most other cities in the country, thanks to our 24/7 subway system, citywide bus 
network, and dense, walkable communities. But we can do more.

Despite widespread mass transit use, New York City’s transportation sector, which 
includes private vehicles, freight, and mass transit (subway, commuter rail, and bus), 
makes up 23 percent of the city’s total greenhouse gas emissions. Fossil fuels burned 
in passenger cars contribute 16 percent of the citywide total, while those in trucks 
are responsible for an additional four percent. On-road vehicles also emit 
particulates and other air pollutants such as nitrogen and sulfur oxides (NOX and 
SOX), which contribute to asthma rates and premature mortality.

The transportation investments detailed under Vision 1 of this plan are the first key 
steps to diversified low-carbon transportation options for New Yorkers. Select Bus 
Service, the expansion of bike networks and bike share, safer streets for walking and 
biking, expanded ferry service, and upgrades to the subway system all reduce the 
need for getting around by car and will have regional impacts on greenhouse gas as 
well as air pollutant emissions. These benefits will help create cleaner communities 
and reduce commute times, thereby enhancing livable neighborhoods and providing 
a better quality of life for all New Yorkers.

Beyond the currently planned investments in better buses, an expanded bike 
network, safer streets, and improved transit, the Department of Transportation 
(DOT), in partnership with the Mayor’s Office of Sustainability (MOS), will develop 
a long-term plan for further reductions in emissions from the cars and trucks in New 
York City to achieve the necessary GHG reductions on a trajectory to 80 x 50. This 
will include consideration of additional policies and investments that emphasize 
low-carbon and multi-modal options such as walking and biking; reduced 
dependency on private fossil fuel vehicles; greater use of low- or zero-emission 
vehicles; improved mass transit; and the continued development of zoning and 
parking policies to further these goals. The City is already working to encourage the 
use of alternative vehicles. For example, since the end of 2014, the electrical systems 
of all new parking garages and open parking lots, as well as those undergoing 
increases in electric service, must be capable of supporting electric vehicle charging 
stations. Other alternative vehicle programs are discussed under the air quality goal 
of this plan.

172

80 x 50nyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Supporting Initiatives 

A. Reduce carbon emissions from the City government’s vehicle fleet

As technologies such as electric vehicles, biodiesel, compressed natural gas, 
gas-electric hybrid, and hydrogen-powered vehicles come to market, they will 
contribute to the solution. As discussed in more detail in the air quality section of 
this plan, the City will continue to pursue clean vehicle technology adoption 
pilots and strategies.

Proper fuel management is paramount to reducing consumption and efficient 
operations, and the City will introduce new fuel use reporting protocols and 
anti-idling technologies and enforcement to control consumption. 

For vehicles used for City government functions, the City’s current vehicle 
fleet-share program with Zipcar will be expanded to at least 1,000 vehicles by 
2017, up from its current 600 vehicles across five City agencies.

Initiative 3
Build upon Zero Waste to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
from the solid waste sector

Every day, New Yorkers generate 18,500 tons of waste. Only a portion of this waste is 
recycled, composted, or converted to energy. Most of it is sent by truck to landfills, 
where it releases methane as it decomposes. Together, this adds up to over two 
million tons of CO2e a year, or four percent of the city’s total. 

Emissions have decreased 22 percent in the solid waste sector since 2005, as New 
Yorkers generate less waste and some of the waste transport has shifted to rail and 
barge. However, to reach our 80 x 50 goal, additional GHG emissions reductions 
must be attained. In the near term, the City will focus on waste reduction, scaling up 
the processing of organic waste, improving recycling, addressing commercial waste, 
and identifying the waste destinations that result in the smallest emissions footprint. 
Achieving 80 x 50 will require changing behaviors through education and 
incentives, strengthening regulations, investing in new infrastructure, and working 
closely with the communities and industries that generate waste.

As detailed in the following section, the City is adopting a Zero Waste goal. The 
various initiatives required to meet this ambitious goal and divert all waste from 
landfills will be a key component of our 2025 GHG emissions reduction action plan. 
As with the other sectors, the 2025 action plan will aim to put the city on a trajectory 
toward 80 x 50 and will identify further initiatives to close the remaining gap.

173

Methane capture at Fresh  
Kills Landfill

80 x 50nyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City One City: Built to Last  
report cover

Initiative 4
Continue implementation of One City: Built to Last to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions from buildings by 30 
percent by 2025, and chart a long-term path away from 
fossil fuels 

Our effort to achieve 80 x 50 began through One City: Built to Last. This comprehensive 
ten-year action plan aims to retrofit public and private buildings to reduce GHG 
emissions, generate jobs and business growth in construction and energy services, and 
provide operational savings to owners and tenants. One City: Built to Last has established 
an interim target to reduce emissions from energy used in buildings by 30 percent by 
2025 from a 2005 baseline and reduce emissions by 35 percent in City-owned buildings 
to maintain a trajectory toward the 80 x 50 goal. In 2015, the City convened the Buildings 
Technical Working Group, with leaders in real estate, architecture, engineering,  
labor, affordable housing, and environmental advocacy to help develop the indicators, 
interim metrics, high performance construction standards, and potential mandates for 
existing buildings. The goals of the Buildings Technical Working Group are closely 
linked to the City’s affordable housing plan, Housing New York, as utility costs continue 
to rise and disproportionately impact low-income residents.

The initiatives mentioned above for the power, transportation, and solid waste sectors 
follow the One City: Built to Last model in determining interim targets and developing 
long-term GHG reduction policies to ensure 80 x 50. For the buildings sector, the City 
will retrofit every City-owned property with significant energy use and will install 100 
MW of renewable power by 2025. For privately-owned buildings, the City will create a 
thriving market for energy efficiency and renewable energy investments and services, 
establish world class green building and energy codes, and make New York City a global 
hub for clean energy technology and innovation. In 2015, the City will launch the Energy 
and Water Retrofit Accelerator, which will offer technical assistance and education 
programs to help building owners make energy- and water-saving retrofits. Coupled 
with access to innovative financing and incentives, these programs will generate demand 
for private sector energy efficiency and renewable energy services. The City will also 
launch a specific initiative for small and midsize buildings, with an initial focus on 
neighborhoods within Con Edison’s Brooklyn/Queens Demand Management Zone, 
which includes Brownsville, East New York, Cypress Hills, and Ozone Park. The City 
will work to accelerate customer-side solutions, including demand reduction at scale, 
energy storage, and distributed generation, to help ensure the reliability of the electricity 
network and realize energy use reductions in neighborhoods facing disproportionate 
affordability pressures. The City will also bring access to energy use information to 
mid-size buildings by requiring energy benchmarking and audits to identify the greatest 
opportunities for conservation and savings. 

To serve the specific needs of the affordable housing sector, the Department of 
Housing Preservation and Development, in conjunction with the Housing 

174

80 x 50nyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Development Corporation, will implement the Green Housing Preservation 
Program to integrate energy audits and conservation measures into its moderate 
rehabilitation projects. NYCHA will implement a series of Energy Performance 
Contracts projected to total over $100 million, representing the largest energy 
savings program for any public housing authority in the country. The first in the 
series, expected to total $40 to $60 million, will target inefficient lighting and boilers 
within the Housing Authority portfolio.

A number of One City: Built to Last initiatives are already underway, including the NYC 
Carbon Challenge—a voluntary carbon reduction program among universities, hospitals, 
commercial offices, and multi-family buildings to reduce emissions by 30 percent or 
more in 10 years. The City is also expanding educational opportunities to improve 
building operations and maintenance. The City continues to implement data-driven 
GreeNYC public education campaigns to foster energy-consumption reduction for 
residents. Through these initiatives, the City will continue to work with commercial 
building owners and tenants to raise awareness of tenants’ energy use and encourage 
investments in energy-efficient retrofits. Low-cost measures such as using sensors and 
smart controls to turn off lights in commercial and retail spaces at night will reduce 
energy waste, commensurate GHG emissions, and light pollution. 

The City has taken steps to expand renewable power on buildings. City government is 
leading by example with a target to install 100 megawatts of renewable energy on 
City-owned buildings by 2025. Through the Department of Citywide Administrative 
Services Energy Management, twenty-four schools across the five boroughs are already 
slated for solar photovoltaic (PV) installations. The City is actively surveying over 80 
City properties for rooftop solar PV potential, with another 50 assessments already 
identified for the coming years. Feasibility studies will also target innovative, non-roof-
mounted solutions such as parking canopies; ground mounted and other building 
deployments; development of resilient solar PV resources through incorporation of 
energy storage technologies; and piloting wind, geothermal, and other clean-energy 
resources across City properties. In the private sector, the City has expanded the NYC 
Solar Partnership to facilitate solar PV adoption on private sector buildings and reach 
previously underserved areas through innovations in community-shared solar. The goal 
is to reach 250 megawatts of production capacity by 2025. 

175

80 x 50nyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City INDICATORS + TARGETS

 Reduce volume of 
DSNY-collected refuse (ex-
cluding material collected 
for reuse/recycling) by 90 
percent relative to 2005 
baseline of ~3.6M tons

 Increase curbside and con-
tainerized diversion from a 
rate of 15.4 percent in 2014

 Increase citywide diversion 
rate (including all streams 
of waste: residential, com-
mercial, construction and 
demolition, and fill) from 
current state of ~52 percent

Zero Waste

Goal: New York City will send zero waste to landfills 
by 2030

Overview
Every week, the average New Yorker throws out nearly 15 pounds of waste at home 
and another nine pounds of waste at work and in commercial establishments. 
Altogether, in New York City this adds up to more than three million tons of 
residential waste and three million tons of commercial waste generated per year.  
To manage all of this waste, the City has developed a complex system to collect, 
transport, and dispose of waste. It is a system with an enormous impact on our 
neighborhoods, our environment, and our economy.

The things New Yorkers throw away contain potentially valuable resources. For 25 
years, the City has offered curbside recycling programs to divert certain materials, 
including paper, metal, plastic, and glass, from the refuse stream. However, these 
programs divert only 15.4 percent of the waste collected by City workers. 

But we are moving in the right direction. In 2013, the City began a pilot curbside 
collection program for organic waste, such as food scraps, yard waste, and soiled 
paper. This program will continue to expand to serve a total of 133,000 households in 
all five boroughs. In addition, many New Yorkers already choose to donate or sell used 
clothing, furniture, and other household goods. These efforts reflect a changing 
focus—how we export and dispose of waste has become an opportunity for us to build 
industries and develop a local economy around materials that can be recovered.

Building on these achievements, the City will become a worldwide leader in 
solid waste management by achieving a goal of Zero Waste by 2030. We will 
eliminate the need to send our waste to out-of-state landfills, thus minimizing the 
overall environmental impact of our trash. To measure our progress toward this 
goal, we will track the extent of our waste reduction and how much we divert waste 
away from landfills. We have set an ambitious target of reducing the amount of waste 
disposed of by 90 percent by 2030 from a 2005 baseline—and we are already taking 
steps to get there. For example, the decision to ban expanded polystyrene foam was 
a positive step in this direction.

This report charts the full path to Zero Waste by enumerating several bold 
initiatives, including the expansion of the NYC Organics curbside collection and 
local drop-off site programs to serve all New Yorkers by the end of 2018. It also aims 
to implement single-stream recycling collection for metal, glass, plastic, and paper 
products by 2020.

176

nyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Solid Waste Management Plan  
Implementation

2014 or Earlier

2015

2016

2017

2018

DSNY Facility

Contract Facility

Wasteshed Border

WM-Harlem River 
Yard TS

East 91st St MTS

Covanta-Essex RRF

WM-Review TS

WM-Varick TS

Hamilton Ave MTS

Staten Island TS

North 
Shore MTS

Southwest 
Brooklyn MTS

In the 1970s and ’80s, New York City came to symbolize the modern “garbage crisis.”  
In 1973, the National League of Cities and the U.S. Conference of Mayors issued a report docu-
menting the skyrocketing volume of solid waste and the sharp decline in available urban land  
for disposal sites. The notorious Fresh Kills Landfill in Staten Island became the largest in the 
country, and the City’s incinerators burned garbage without the environmental controls of  
today’s energy-from-waste facilities. With the gradual closure of Fresh Kills beginning in the 
1990s, low-income and minority neighborhoods in the South Bronx, northern Brooklyn, and 
southeast Queens increasingly bore the burden of the City’s waste processing facilities. 

Over time, the City improved waste management operations, closing its incinerators and landfills 
and, in 1989, creating the nation’s largest mandatory recycling program. The 2006 adoption of the 
City’s comprehensive Solid Waste Management Plan (SWMP) was a landmark achievement for 
long-term waste planning and environmental justice. The plan was championed by grassroots envi-
ronmental justice organizations, who long advocated for the City to switch from a truck-based waste 
export system that overburdened low-income communities to an equitable network of marine and 
rail transfer stations located in all five boroughs. 

In 2015, the City opened the North Shore Marine Transfer Station in College Point, the first of four 
converted marine transfer stations that will open under the SWMP. At the North Shore facility, De-
partment of Sanitation (DSNY) employees transfer waste from collection trucks into sealed shipping 
containers to be shipped out by barge. Once it operates at full capacity, that facility will shift nearly 
1,000 tons of waste out of the overburdened neighborhood of Jamaica, Queens.

177

Zero Wastenyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City New York Paydirt Potting  
Soil from the Lower East Side 
Ecology Center

Staten Island compost facility

Initiative 1
Expand the New York City Organics program to serve all 
New Yorkers by the end of 2018

Food scraps, yard waste, and soiled paper not suitable for recycling make up 31 
percent of the city’s residential waste stream. In landfills, this organic material 
decomposes, releasing methane gas, a greenhouse gas six times more potent than 
carbon dioxide. However, this material can be composted and converted into a 
nutrient-rich natural fertilizer that can replenish our city’s soil, strengthen our parks 
and street trees, and enrich community gardens. Energy-rich food waste can also be 
processed through anaerobic digestion, wherein microbes break down complex fats 
and carbohydrates, releasing methane gas that can be captured and used as an 
alternative to natural gas.

In 1993, the City created the NYC Compost Project to educate New Yorkers about 
the benefits of composting their food and yard waste, as well as foster community-
scale composting initiatives in all five boroughs. In 2013, DSNY began a pilot 
program to offer curbside organic-waste collection service to residents of 
Westerleigh, Staten Island, to test the feasibility of collecting the material directly 
from residents’ homes. Today, the program serves more than 100,000 households in 
all five boroughs, covering 240,000 New Yorkers. In 2015, the program will expand 
once again to an additional 33,000 households with nearly 100,000 residents.

To meet our goal of Zero Waste, we will expand the NYC Organics program by 
increasing curbside organics collection and convenient local drop-off sites. To do 
this, DSNY will complete the evaluation of the curbside organics collection pilot 
required by Local Law 77 of 2013. In 2015, DSNY will submit a report to the Mayor and 
City Council, detailing the results of the pilot and the Department’s plans to expand 
curbside collection service. 

Supporting Initiatives 
A. Develop additional organics sorting and processing capacity in New York 

City and the region

Currently, material collected on Staten Island through the City’s curbside organics 
collection pilot is delivered to the City-owned composting facility on the site of the Fresh 
Kills Landfill. There, workers sort out non-compostable contaminants such as plastic bags, 
and pile the material into long piles called windrows where organisms break down the 
organic waste into a nutrient-rich soil-like product. Material collected in the other 
boroughs is transported to compost facilities in upstate New York and Connecticut. 
However, these facilities don’t have the capacity to take all the waste we generate. 

178

Zero Wastenyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City To meet the growing quantities of source-separated organic waste collected 
through the NYC Organics program and other initiatives, the City will work with 
local non-profit organizations and private-sector partners to develop additional 
capacity for sorting and processing organic waste. 

In addition, we will expand and upgrade the Staten Island Compost Facility and 
explore additional sites for developing City-owned compost facilities in the other 
four boroughs. 

B. Process 250 tons of food waste per day at City WWTPs and assess long-term 

feasibility of scaling up processing of organic food waste 

In 2013, the City launched a pilot program at an existing WWTP to process food 
waste in anaerobic digesters, boosting the production of renewable biogas on-site. 
DSNY and DEP will expand that pilot to process up to 250 tons of organic waste 
per day over a three-year demonstration period. DEP and National Grid will 
construct gas-processing infrastructure to feed the high-quality renewable 
natural gas into the surrounding grid to heat homes and businesses.

If the demonstration project is successful, the WWTP has the capacity to treat up 
to 500 tons per day of organic waste – about eight percent of the city’s total food 
waste (i.e., residential and commercial combined). This scale is unprecedented 
anywhere in the country and has the potential to produce enough energy to heat 
5,200 homes and reduce annual greenhouse gas emissions by 90,000 tons. 
Together, DSNY and DEP will assess the long-term feasibility of scaling up the 
processing of organic food waste through anaerobic digestion. The City will also 
explore options to beneficially use biosolids resulting from the processing of 
organic waste at WWTPs.

C. Expand community composting opportunities in all five boroughs

Long before the City began curbside organics collection, community groups such 
as the Lower East Side Ecology Center and Build It Green! NYC offered local 
residents the opportunity to drop off food scraps for composting. Although 
community composting diverts only a small amount of organic waste compared to 
curbside collection, it plays a big role in engaging and educating New Yorkers 
about the importance of composting. It raises awareness of what compost is and 
what benefits it provides through both outreach and education, and how to use it 
to grow food and care for green spaces in New York City neighborhoods. Making 
and using compost locally demonstrates to New Yorkers firsthand that apple cores 
and eggshells are not garbage, but rather useful resources. Today, New York City 
has 225 community composting sites, and we will work to expand this number by 
establishing new sites in neighborhoods across the five boroughs.

179

Zero Wastenyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 2
Enhance the City’s curbside recycling program by 
offering single-stream recycling by 2020

Mixed paper, magazines, newspapers, and cardboard make up 18 percent of the 
City’s residential waste stream. Metal, glass, and all rigid plastics make up another 14 
percent. Almost all of the products collected through the traditional green-bin and 
blue-bin curbside recycling programs can be cleaned and remade into new products. 
Paper collected in Manhattan, for example, travels by barge to a plant on Staten 
Island where it is made into pizza boxes and other cardboard products. However, 
last year, New Yorkers recycled only 42 percent of these materials. 

To achieve our goal of Zero Waste, we will make it easier for New Yorkers to 
recycle and expand our recycling education and outreach.

When the City began offering curbside recycling collection in 1989, we collected 
newspapers and cardboard separate from bottles and cans. Today, the two-bin 
collections continue, but advances in sorting and recycling technology have made it 
easier to separate comingled material into high-value, single-commodity streams. 
Most other large cities in the U.S. have already combined their recycling streams into 
one, and these cities have seen improvements in recycling rates. In New York City, 
we expect that offering single-stream recycling will increase diversion rates by as 
much as 20 percent, up from 16 percent. Single-stream recycling means not only 
fewer recycling bins in the home, but also fewer trucks to collect the material, 
reducing neighborhood truck traffic and air pollution. We will work in partnership 
with our recycling vendors to develop a plan to convert all curbside recycling 
collections from dual-stream to single-stream in the next five years.

Supporting Initiative
A. Create and expand markets for recycled materials

Separating and collecting recyclable materials is a huge first step toward reaping 
the environmental and economic benefits of recycling. However, many of the 
products we buy do not contain recyclable materials, and markets for recycled 
materials remain poorly defined. We are working with trade associations, industry 
groups, waste management companies, and some of the world’s largest consumer 
goods manufacturers and retailers to identify barriers to increasing recycled 
content of new products and to identify product designs that make it even easier 
to recycle. Through these partnerships, we will push an aggressive agenda, 
including everything from clear, easy-to-understand recycling instructions on 
packaging to products made from 100 percent post-consumer recycled material. 
Through these steps, New York City will become a global leader in the 
movement to develop a “circular economy” where resources are used again 
and again, rather than mined from the earth and dumped into landfills.

180

Zero Wastenyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Waste sorting at South Brooklyn 
Marine Terminal

181

Zero Wastenyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 3
Reduce the use of plastic bags and other  
non-compostable waste

In January 2015, the City announced that it would move forward with a ban on all 
expanded polystyrene foam food-service containers and packing peanuts after a 
thorough market analysis determined that recycling markets do not exist for those 
products. Expanded polystyrene foam is a lightweight material that often 
contaminates the organic material collected from homes and schools. It is a major 
source of neighborhood litter—the City currently collects more than 28,000 tons of 
expanded polystyrene foam per year. The ban will encourage residents and 
businesses to switch to reusable, recyclable, or compostable alternative products. 
We will continue to identify hard-to-recycle products in the City’s waste stream and 
develop programs to reduce their use and encourage more sustainable alternatives.

Single-use plastic bags make up 2.3 percent of the City’s waste and cost the City 
nearly $10 million per year to dispose of in landfills. They are a major component of 
street litter and can clog storm drains, jam the machinery at the City’s recycling 
sorting facility, and end up in New York Harbor. Even single-use paper bags, which 
are recyclable in the paper recycling stream, are only recycled at a rate of five 
percent, and are often made from virgin trees and not recycled paper. Cities such as 
San Francisco, Portland, and Los Angeles have already banned the use of plastic bags 
and implemented fees for the purchase of other types of bags. Other cities, including 
Washington, D.C., have instituted a flat fee for all single-use bags. Because so many 
viable alternatives to plastic bags exist—including reusable, compostable, and paper 
bags—we will work with the City Council to reduce the overall impact of these 
products on our local environment.

Initiative 4
Give every New Yorker the opportunity to recycle and 
reduce waste, including at NYCHA housing

Today, recycling diversion rates vary widely from neighborhood to neighborhood. 
Older, denser residential neighborhoods often have buildings that lack adequate space 
for recycling bins. In NYCHA developments, small and inconvenient recycling bins 
have gone unused for much of the last decade. This spring, NYCHA has begun to 
tackle this challenge head-on, so as to allow residents the opportunity to recycle like 
every other New Yorker by constructing new recycling centers at all NYCHA 
developments. DSNY and GrowNYC will work with NYCHA to train residents, 
community leaders, and staff on recycling and waste reduction practices. Through 
partnerships with private and non-profit organizations, NYCHA will continue to 
support improvements in recycling rates as part of a comprehensive waste 
management strategy.

182

Commuter composting at a  
subway station in Long Island  
City, Queens

Zero Wastenyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City In addition to working with NYCHA developments, we will expand outreach to 
low-income and immigrant communities with the goal of doubling recycling 
diversion rates in these communities over the next five years. We will translate 
recycling mailers and pamphlets into the City’s eight most commonly spoken 
languages and work with local community organizations, block associations, and 
community-garden groups to give people the tools they need to reduce waste and 
recycle more. 

Initiative 5
Make all schools Zero Waste Schools

New York City schools are educating our next generation of recyclers. There is a 
tremendous opportunity to reduce landfill waste from schools, which generate more 
than 40,000 tons of refuse per year. Setting up the infrastructure in the schools, as well 
as teaching the City’s 1.1 million students about proper recycling practices, can also 
help improve waste reduction reuse and recycling, and instill sustainable practices 
that last a lifetime. 

The Departments of Education (DOE) and DSNY will collaborate to launch the first 100 
Zero Waste Schools, with the ambitious goal of diverting all recyclable and compostable 
waste from those schools within five years. Through the collaboration of students, parents, 
teachers, principals, custodians, and cafeteria staff, these schools will become models for 
others and advance a culture of recycling and sustainability throughout the school system.

PS 32 Samuel Mills Sprole School 
2014 Golden Apple Award winners

183

Zero Wastenyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 6
Expand opportunities to reuse and recycle textiles and 
electronic waste

Used clothing and textiles can be readily reused. Non-profits such as Goodwill and the 
Salvation Army collect, clean, and distribute used clothing to those in need. The City’s 
re-fashioNYC program, operated in partnership with Housing Works, offers in-
building collection for apartment buildings with 10 or more units and currently serves 
more than 100,000 households in 553 apartment buildings and complexes. Even with 
these readily available reuse and recycling options, used clothing and textiles still 
make up six percent of the city’s waste. We will continue to grow and develop the 
City’s non-profit reuse sector, connecting potential donors with organizations that 
reuse or resell material to support the arts, public health, and other causes. We will 
expand the re-fashioNYC program to serve even more New Yorkers.

Although it contributes less than one 
percent of the total waste stream, 
electronic waste contains many toxic 
materials, including mercury, 
cadmium, lead, and other heavy 
metals. Recycling electronic waste 
not only keeps these toxins from 
polluting the air, soil, and water, it 
also reduces energy and water use 
associated with manufacturing new 
materials. In January 2015, a New 
York State law banning the disposal of 
electronic waste took effect, barring 
the City from collecting these 
materials as refuse. New Yorkers now 
have many convenient options for 
recycling their electronic waste, 
including drop-off programs at more 
than 95 retailers citywide. 

Clothing carts from re-fashioNYC

The City has also created the e-cycleNYC program, which offers room cleanouts, 
storage bins, and recycling events to apartment buildings with 10 or more units at no 
cost to residents. Since the program began in 2013, more than 4,000 buildings have 
signed up; we will continue to reach out to property owners, superintendents, and 
cooperative boards to expand the program. In 2015, the City will double the number 
of Solvents, Automotive, Flammables, and Electronics (SAFE) disposal events held 
in each borough to give residents an opportunity to drop off electronics and other 
household hazardous waste, including chemicals and prescription drugs. The City 
will explore opportunities to partner with other organizations to collect and recycle 
electronic waste from residents who may be unable to bring it to a drop-off location.

184

Zero Wastenyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 7
Develop an equitable blueprint for a Save-As-You-Throw 
program to reduce waste

The City anticipates spending more than $350 million a year to dispose of waste in 
out-of-city landfills and energy-from-waste facilities. While the amount of waste we 
create has decreased steadily over the past decade, the costs of disposing and 
transporting that waste has increased, while space in landfills has decreased. However, 
New Yorkers are largely insulated from the growing cost of disposing of their waste, 
since transportation and disposal are funded through the City’s general fund. Volume-
based incentives for residents and property owners can lead to reduced waste volumes 
and higher recycling rates, thereby reducing disposal costs and cutting back the 
environmental impacts of landfilling waste. Other cities, including San Jose and 
Seattle, have seen large decreases in waste generation and increases in recycling rates 
as a result of implementing use-based incentives for refuse. For example, in San Jose, 
recycling more than doubled in the three years after a user-fee program was 
implemented in the early 1990s. In New York City, implementing a Save-As-You-
Throw program that would reward those who waste less and recycle more could 
reduce waste generation by as much as 30 percent. The program would represent the 
largest potential contribution toward our Zero Waste goal.

To evaluate this policy and develop a fair, equitable blueprint for waste reduction, 
the City will assemble a working group of representatives from the Administration, 
City Council, affordable housing advocates, tenant associations, property managers, 
environmental advocates, good-government groups, and many others. This group 
will be tasked with evaluating the range of options available to help New Yorkers 
save money as they reduce waste, and recommending solutions to address the 
mounting costs of disposing of and transporting waste. 

185

Zero Wastenyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 8
Reduce commercial waste disposal by 90 percent by 2030

New York City’s commercial establishments—offices, restaurants, hotels, shops, and 
manufacturers—create an estimated three million tons of waste per year, less than 
one-third of which is currently recycled. Waste and recyclables from these 
businesses are collected by private waste hauling companies. Through a 
combination of legislative reform, public-private partnerships and incentives, the 
City will aim to reduce commercial waste by 90 percent by 2030.

Supporting Initiatives
A. Conduct a comprehensive study of commercial waste collection zones

New York is unique in that is has a commercial waste collection system completely 
separate from the municipally controlled residential waste system. A fully 
privatized system drives down prices through competition, which is good for small 
businesses but can also result in additional trucks on the road. The City is taking 
steps to clean up the commercial fleet. For example, it recently enacted legislation 
that will hold commercial waste haulers to stricter emissions standards.

In recent years, cities such as Los Angeles and San Jose have established an exclusive 
commercial solid waste franchise system with exclusive hauler districts/zones. 
Proponents of this system believe this model empowers municipalities to achieve 
multiple environmental, economic, and labor-related policy goals by setting quality 
and cost-of-service terms in exchange for exclusive carter contracts. The impacts of 
drawing up commercial waste zones and bidding them out to an exclusive waste 
hauler, or haulers, would certainly be significant. To evaluate the feasibility and 
appropriateness of this course of action, the City will conduct a study to determine if 
there are substantial inefficiencies in the way waste is collected and if so, whether 
exclusive collection zones would reduce those inefficiencies and possibly create 
ancillary benefits such as improved recycling rates, working conditions, and wages.

B. Encourage periodic waste audits for large commercial buildings

Solid waste generation is unlike energy and water consumption in that it cannot be 
metered or easily measured. That said, the primary way for an entity to improve its 
sustainable operations and potentially lower the costs associated with waste 
management is by taking stock of its waste generation. Additionally, knowing what 
a business throws away is as important as knowing how much it disposes.

In just a few years, the City has begun to see energy reductions in large commercial 
buildings as a result of making energy auditing, and now retrofitting, a requirement. As 
a first step, the City will develop a voluntary audit program to track commercial waste 
generation trends. The City will also explore working with the City Council on a measure 
requiring large commercial buildings to periodically conduct waste audits and report their 
findings. These efforts represent a critical step in determining the waste generation 
characteristics of businesses, an area that historically has been short of reliable data.

186

Zero Wastenyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City C. Create a Zero Waste Challenge program for large commercial waste 

generators

New York City launched a voluntary commercial food-waste diversion program in 
2013 with the support of more than 100 New York City restaurants. The 
participants committed to a 50-percent food-waste diversion goal, as well as 
ongoing reporting of their progress. Within the first six months of this public-
private partnership, the Food Waste Challenge reduced organic waste citywide by 
2,500 tons—the largest single source of food waste diversion at the time—
demonstrating the potential impact of voluntary programs. Building on the 
success of the Food Waste Challenge, the City will create a Zero Waste Challenge 
program for large commercial waste generators. 

D. Revise the commercial recycling rules to make recycling easier for 

businesses

Recycling is the law in New York City for residents and businesses alike. Existing 
commercial recycling regulations designate recyclable materials based on the 
business type. However, this presents a disconnect between what is required for 
New Yorkers at home versus their places of work or entertainment, thus creating 
confusion for businesses. 

By 2016, working closely with the City Council, DSNY will initiate commercial 
recycling regulation and enforcement system reforms. By permitting single-stream 
recycling and holding commercial entities responsible for diverting the same 
materials residents are obliged to recycle, the City hopes to achieve behavioral step 
changes and increase diversion rates citywide.

E. Require all food service establishments to source-separate food waste

New York City’s commercial waste stream is comparable to its residential waste stream 
in terms of the share of food waste it’s comprised of. With organics constituting over 
one-third of the total waste stream, diverting this material for beneficial use—as a soil 
amendment through composting or as feedstock for clean, renewable energy through 
anaerobic digestion—is a major opportunity area. However, the lack of food-waste 
processing capacity in New York City and the region has presented a challenge for both 
businesses and haulers wishing to divert food waste. 

In 2013, New York City Council passed a law requiring select large food waste 
generating businesses to separate their organic waste and ensure its diversion from 
landfills. This legislation has a phased approach to catalyze the expansion in 
industrial processing-capacity needed to make organics diversion viable long-term. 
In 2015, DSNY will begin identifying the first set of businesses that must source-
separate their organic waste. As processing capacity in the region continues to grow, 
the City will require all food-service establishments and related businesses to 
separate their organic waste for composting.

187

Zero Wastenyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City INDICATORS + TARGETS

 Achieve best air-quality 
ranking among major U.S. 
cities by 2030 (PM2.5)

 Reduce disparity in SO2 
across city neighborhoods by 
50 percent by 2030, relative 
to 2013

 Reduce disparity in PM2.5 
across city neighborhoods by 
20 percent by 2030, relative 
to 2013

Air Quality 

Goal: New York City will have the best air quality 
among all large U.S. cities by 2030

Overview
New York City’s air is becoming progressively cleaner. Over the past several decades, 
actions taken at the federal, state, and local levels have dramatically improved air 
quality. New York City’s particulate matter (PM2.5) concentration has decreased more 
rapidly than in most other big U.S. cities, declining by about 25 percent between 2008 
and 2013. As a result, the city’s air-quality ranking among major U.S. cities improved 
from seventh place as recently as 2008-2010 to fourth place in 2011-2013. 

Despite this progress, air pollution remains a leading environmental threat to 
the health of New Yorkers. Levels of air pollution in New York City continue to 
cause serious health problems, contributing to a number of hospital admissions and 
deaths, mainly from heart and lung problems. It is estimated that particulate matter 
(PM2.5) contributes to more than 2,000 deaths and over 6,000 emergency visits and 
hospitalizations for cardiovascular and respiratory disease each year. 

All neighborhoods are affected by these health impacts, but they disproportionately 
occur in high poverty communities and among vulnerable populations. The rate of 
emergency room visits due to PM2.5-attributable asthma is three times higher in the 
most disadvantaged neighborhoods compared to more affluent ones. The public 
health benefits of even modest improvements in air quality are substantial because 
everyone is exposed to air pollution.

Our goal is for New York City to have the best air quality among all large U.S. 
cities. We are committed to reducing disparities in ambient pollution level 
exposures within the city by 20 percent for PM2.5 and 50 percent for sulfur dioxide 
(SO2) by 2030 relative to 2013. Meeting this goal will require significant reductions 
in air pollutant emissions. We will need to implement local strategies, as well as 
continue working with state and federal partners to reduce emissions from upwind 
sources. In addition, New York City will need to outpace improvements in other 
cities to attain this goal.

Improving our air quality is feasible and has been demonstrated in recent 
years. Reducing the disparity in pollutant levels across the city is also attainable, as 
demonstrated by declining differences in community SO2 concentrations. Between 
2008 and 2013, the difference between the highest and lowest community district 
SO2 concentrations declined by more than half while overall concentrations declined 
by 70 percent, mainly due to State efforts to reduce sulfur content in heating oil and 
the City’s efforts to phase out the use of heavy heating-fuel oil in buildings.

188

nyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City There are many sources of air pollution, mainly derived from fuel combustion 
within and outside the city. Based on best estimates of current emissions, for PM2.5, 
49 percent of emissions are from buildings, 24 percent from traffic, 19 percent from 
non-road mobile sources, and 7 percent from electric-power generation (one percent 
from other sources). For SO2, 61 percent of emissions are from buildings, five percent 
from vehicles, 14 percent from non-road mobile sources, 17 percent from electric 
power generation, and 3 percent from other sources. 

This plan focuses on reducing local PM2.5 and SO2 emissions. While they are not the 
only harmful pollutants, they are the two most important pollutants for public 
health that the City is able to substantially reduce through local emission controls.

PM2.5 concentrations for New York City and other large cities  
(over one million residents)
3-year rolling annual average
30.0

25.0

20.0

15.0

10.0

5.0

0

)

3

m

/

g

μ

(

 

5

.

2

 

M
P

 

E
G
A
R
E
V
A

 

L
A
U
N
N
A

New York

Chicago

Dallas

Houston

Los Angeles

Philadelphia

Phoenix

San Antonio

San Diego

1

9

9

9

2

0

0

0

2

0

0

1

2

0

0

2

2

0

0

3

2

0

0

4

2

0

0

5

2

0

0

6

2

0

0

7

2

0

0

8

2

0

0

9

2

0

1

0

2

0

1

1

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

2

0

0

1

2

0

0

2

2

0

0

3

2

0

0

4

2

0

0

5

2

0

0

6

2

0

0

7

2

0

0

8

2

0

0

9

2

0

1

0

2

0

1

1

2

0

1

2

2

0

1

3

Source: US EPA, Air Quality System

Initiative 1
Enforce the updated DEP Air Pollution Control Code

The recently updated DEP Air Pollution Control Code controls emissions from 
currently unregulated sources such as commercial charbroilers, wood boilers, 
refrigeration trucks, and mobile food trucks. Altogether, these unregulated sources 
account for 14 percent of local PM2.5 emissions.

Reducing emissions from commercial charbroiling is a cost-effective way to address 
a currently unregulated and significant pollution source. An analysis based on 
2005-2007 data estimated that installing existing control technology could reduce 
charbroiler emissions in New York City by 85 percent and result in over 300 avoided 
deaths and 500 avoided emergency department visits and hospitalizations for 
cardiovascular and respiratory disease annually. The code also provides incentives 
to use clean technologies for auxiliary power units (APUs) for mobile food trucks 
and refrigeration trucks through registration-fee waivers and stricter controls on 
idling for vehicles without APUs.

189

Air Qualitynyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 2
Identify additional targeted air quality improvements 
through data analysis and community engagement 

Since December 2008, the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DOHMH) 
has monitored criteria for air pollutants at street-level sites around the city through 
the New York City Community Air Survey. This survey has provided essential data 
to design sound policy and inform research. 

Persuant to available funding, DOHMH will seek to build on this success by 
developing a community air quality “citizen-science” toolkit that will include 
how-to guides for accessing available data on emission sources, designing 
neighborhood air pollution surveys using new, low-cost technologies, and sharing 
data online. DOHMH also plans to expand its Environment and Health Data Portal 
to incorporate neighborhood-level sustainability indicators, create a neighborhood-
level “Sustainability and Health” report, and develop an educational module on 
sustainability and health for outreach in public schools and CBOs. These efforts can 
provide valuable data on air pollution hot-spots and local emissions sources that 
may be used to inform future control measures beyond those proposed in this plan. 

Mortality and morbidity from selected 
conditions due to PM2.5 in New York City

PM2.5-Attributable
Adult Mortality Rate*

PM2.5-Attributable Cardiovascular 
Hospitalization Rate*

33.1 - 37.1

37.2 - 43.6

43.7 - 50.3

50.4 - 58.8

58.9 - 77.6

9.6 - 13.2

13.3 - 16.5

16.6 - 18.8

18.9 - 21.6

21.7 - 26.9

PM2.5-Attributable Asthma
Emergency Department
Visits Among Children*

19.5 - 38.0

38.1 - 81.7

81.8 - 122.8

122.9 - 200.2

200.3 - 299.4

0

2.5

5

10

Miles

N

0

2.5

5

10

Miles

N

0

2.5

5

10

Miles

N

* 2009-2011 Annual Average, Rate per 100,000 persons

DOHMH

190

Air Qualitynyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 3
Accelerate conversions of residual heating oil boilers in 
buildings

At the beginning of 2012, there were about 5,300 boilers in the city that still fired #6 fuel 
oil, the heavy heating oil associated with the highest levels of air pollutant emissions. By 
July 2015, the City will no longer issue permits to use #6 fuel oil, so all boilers must 
switch to gas, #2 oil, or #4 oil. As a result of the City’s targeted outreach and 
enforcement efforts, approximately 90 percent of boilers on #6 have been converted. 

Nonetheless, residual oil (#4) will continue to be used by several thousand devices 
as owners have until 2030 to switch from #4 oil to the less-polluting #2 oil, or gas. 
Complete phase out of heavy heating oil (#4 and #6) in New York City could prevent 
80 deaths per year and avoid 200 hospitalizations and hospital emergency 
department visits for heart and lung disease. In addition, it is estimated that 39 
percent of the boilers in buildings over 25,000 square feet that still use heavy oil are 
located in the highest poverty neighborhoods in the city. 

We will therefore explore the feasibility of accelerating the phase out of #4 oil in 
boilers in advance of 2030. In addition, through the Retrofit Accelerator program, 
which, under the 80 x 50 goal, provides technical assistance, financing, and 
incentives for building owners to shift from the most polluting heating fuel to 
cleaner fuels, the City has the opportunity to both reduce GHG emissions and 
achieve considerable public health benefits by targeting buildings in specific high-
poverty neighborhoods. The Mayor’s Office of Sustainability (MOS) will formalize a 
screening methodology to select projects with the highest co-benefits across 
greenhouse gases and air pollutants and to track air pollution benefits as buildings 
convert under the Retrofit Accelerator program.

Predicted reductions in PM2.5 concentrations 
due to heating oil programs

(µg/m3)

-0.09 — -0.42

-0.43 — -0.83

-0.84 — -1.44

-1.45 — -2.60

-2.61 — -4.07

DOHMH

191

Air Qualitynyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 4
Cut emissions from mobile sources

Supporting Initiatives
A. Reduce emissions from the City fleet

The City is currently on track to replace or retrofit 90 percent of its diesel on-road 
vehicles to meet 2007 emissions standards or better by 2017. The impact is 
significant—it is estimated that replacing or retrofitting a vehicle to 2007 
standards reduces emissions by approximately 90 percent over the previous 
standard. The City will consider targeting the remaining 10 percent of its diesel 
on-road vehicles. 

The City is also promoting the adoption of new technologies through a variety of 
innovative projects, including increasing electric vehicles in its fleet. This follows a 
legacy of leadership in technology development and adoption. For example, DSNY 
tested state-of-the-art technology and alternative fuels and helped pioneer the 
improvements in heavy-duty diesel emissions that are now taking place nationwide. 
At present, the City operates over 800 Electric Vehicle (EV) plug-in units of some 
type and plans to reach at least 1,000 EV units in operation by 2017. The City 
currently operates 203 EV chargers, which is the largest network in the state of 
New York. We plan to have at least 250 chargers in operation by 2017. By 2016, the 
City also plans to introduce fast-charging chargers and at least one solar carport, an 
EV charger that draws all its power from solar panels.

B. Reduce emissions from private truck fleets and for-hire vehicles 

Currently, the City’s Hunts Point Clean Trucks Program offers rebates to trucks 
servicing the Hunts Point market for voluntary upgrades to cleaner vehicles or 
fuels, including diesel replacements. Rebates are offered for the costs of 
upgrading or retrofitting to a CNG or hybrid, and old “dirty” trucks are being 
scrapped to ensure they are not resold. As of March 2015, the Hunts Point Clean 
Trucks Program has funded diesel replacement for close to 450 trucks, reducing 
their particulate matter emissions by 97 percent. The City will consider 
replicating the Hunts Point Clean Trucks Program in other industrial areas, with 
a focus on environmental justice communities and including private waste 
haulers serving those communities.

192

Air Qualitynyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City For many years, New York City’s private for-hire transportation has operated on a 
two-tier system: the limited-quantity yellow taxi industry—known for regulated, 
metered fares, street hails, and uniform vehicles—and the uncapped for-hire 
vehicle (FHV) industry. In recent years, the FHV industry has grown 
tremendously, from 38,600 vehicles in 2011 to nearly 60,000 vehicles in 2015 (a 53 
percent increase). Trip data from FHVs shows that, among the biggest FHV bases, 
a large share of trips are taking place in the Manhattan core (around 72 percent). 
Between 2010 and 2014 average traffic speeds in Manhattan have declined 
significantly, down to 8.51 MPH in 2014 from 9.35 MPH in 2010 (a 9 percent 
decrease). The Taxi and Limousine Commission will evaluate the impacts of 
continued growth in the car service industries, including impacts on parking, 
traffic congestion, and air quality.

C. Reduce emissions from vehicle idling and toll crossing

Vehicle idling is a major source of pollution in New York City.  According to the 
Environmental Defense Fund, air pollution from idling engines is a contributor to 
elevated levels of air pollutants, and people who live near heavily-trafficked 
roadways face significantly greater risks of suffering from asthma and heart 
diseases, among other conditions.  Existing laws need to be enforced, and we will 
work with the City Council to explore new ways to address this serious problem.

Finally, the City will work with the MTA to expand the use of gateless tolling—a 
system that dramatically speeds up the process of toll payment—to reduce 
congestion and the attendant vehicle emissions at major bridge and tunnel 
crossings in New York City.

NYC Parks electric vehicle

193

Air Qualitynyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City INDICATOR + TARGET

 Increase number of tax lots 
remediated since beginning 
of 2014 to 750 by 2019

DEFINITION OF  
BROWNFIELD

A brownfield is a vacant or 
underutilized property whose 
redevelopment is impeded by 
the presence or perception of 
environmental contamination.

Brownfields

Goal: New York City will clean up contaminated 
land to address disproportionately high exposures 
in low-income communities and convert land to 
safe and beneficial use

Overview
New York City has over 3,000 vacant commercial and industrial properties and more than 
7,000 properties designated by the City as subject to mandatory environmental study and 
management. Perhaps as many as 40 percent of these properties are chronically vacant or 
underutilized contaminated land, commonly known as brownfield sites. 

Comprehensive brownfield management has the potential to address many 
environmental, social, and economic problems in New York City. As our need for 
space grows, we must use our existing stock of land more effectively. Brownfield 
cleanup and redevelopment represents one of our best opportunities to engage 
communities and reclaim land for development in the city. It also offers an 
opportunity to simultaneously benefit the environment, improve the health of our 
neighborhoods, and attain more equitable and sustainable economic development.

We aim to clean up contaminated land to eliminate exposure to environmental 
toxins and alleviate social inequality caused by disproportionately high occurrences 
of brownfields in low-income neighborhoods.

This disproportionate impact of brownfields is endemic in cities across the U.S. 
These properties remain vacant or underutilized because prospective developers 
fear the risks of environmental liability and government enforcement, as well as 
construction delays and cost over-runs caused by unpredictable land pollution. 
Brownfields result in lost opportunities to create small businesses, new jobs, 
affordable housing, and healthy open space in areas where these opportunities are 
needed most. Oftentimes, their presence leads to a cycle of financial disinvestment 
and a downward economic and social spiral.

Brownfields can contain a wide variety of heavy metals, organic solvents, and other 
pollutants that remain a legacy of past industrial land uses and lax pollution 
management practices that predate modern standards for environmental protection. 
If left abandoned, these properties are a source of heightened public exposure to 
environmental toxins for our most disadvantaged citizens.

Brownfield development

Until recently, no city in the U.S. operated its own regulatory brownfield cleanup 
program. Under PlaNYC 2007, New York City launched the nation’s first municipal 

194

nyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City PROGRESS OF THE NYC 
VOLUNTARY CLEANUP 
PROGRAM

The NYC Voluntary Cleanup 
Program (NYC VCP) follows 
the New York State’s stringent 
cleanup standards and delivers 
the same high-quality cleanups. 
Projects enrolled in the NYC 
VCP receive liability protection 
against government environ-
mental enforcement and the 
convenience of one program 
to address all government 
cleanup responsibilities. Since 
its launch in 2011, the NYC VCP 
has spurred an unprecedented 
period of land cleanup in NYC, 
with remediation of over 260 
projects on over 475 tax lots 
completed or in process. These 
projects will produce safe land 
for over 23.5 million square feet 
of new building space, hun-
dreds of small businesses, and 
over 4,500 permanent new jobs. 
Approximately 23 percent of 
these projects will also produce 
new units of affordable housing. 
The average vacancy of prop-
erties enrolled in the NYC VCP 
is over 11 years, and 57 percent 
are located in low- and mod-
erate-income neighborhoods, 
where housing and economic 
growth are needed most. 

brownfield cleanup program—the NYC Voluntary Cleanup Program (NYC VCP). In 
consultation with environmental and social-justice advocates, the City also 
established over thirty brownfield programs to promote social equality that now 
constitute our Land Cleanup and Revitalization Initiative (LCRI). LCRI is unique as 
it allows the City to manage all steps of the brownfield revitalization process. The 
City no longer has to rely on outside government agencies to achieve local 
environmental, social, and economic goals on brownfields. 

Initiative 1
Accelerate cleanup of brownfields to improve public 
safety and encourage private investment in new 
development on brownfield sites

The City will continue our efforts to clean up brownfields by 
leveraging city and state brownfield programs. Over the next four 
years, we aim to clean up 750 properties through our remediation 
programs, including at least 375 in low- and moderate-income 
communities. This will enable $14 billion in private investment 
and create 5,000 new units of affordable housing. 

We will certify each of these remediated properties in the NYC 
Green Property Certification Program. This certification 
provides the City’s formal recognition that new buildings on cleaned properties are 
among the most environmentally protective places in New York City to live and work. 
The certification is designed to demonstrate our confidence in the safety of remediated 
brownfields and encourage developers to clean up properties using government 
programs. Brownfield cleanup programs can be complex, especially for those unfamiliar 
with the cleanup process. To increase predictability of cleanups, to lower the time and 
cost of cleanup projects, and to encourage greater enrollment in the NYC VCP, we will 
launch EPIC (Environmental Project Information Center) Environment, a web 
application that automates and streamlines cleanup-project navigation. 

To achieve our ambitious goals for both affordable housing and industrial development, 
the City will need to increase the use of both the NYC VCP and the State Brownfield 
Cleanup Program (State BCP). We will encourage the New York State Legislature to pass 
legislation to stabilize the tax credits offered by the State BCP; provide a gateway to those 
tax credits for affordable and supportive housing and industrial development projects; 
lower costs for cleanups, such as providing exemptions for unnecessary state fees and 
taxes that currently apply to cleanup in the NYC VCP; and continue State funding for the 
Brownfield Opportunity Area program for community engagement. We will also 
encourage Congress to reauthorize the IRS Section 198 Brownfield Cleanup Tax 
Deduction, which expired in 2011, to lower cost for cleanup in the NYC VCP.

195

Brownfieldsnyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City NEW YORK CITY  
GREEN PROPERTY CERTIFICATION

The NYC Green Property Certification program was established 
to provide formal recognition for properties that have met strict 
government standards and ensures that these properties are safe 
for new occupants and everyone in the surrounding community. 
When a cleanup in the NYC VCP is complete, the property receives 
the NYC Green Property Certification. This land certification pro-
gram is administered by the NYC Mayor’s Office of Environmental 
Remediation (OER)—a group of experienced scientists and engi-
neers—and symbolizes the City’s confidence that the property and 
its new buildings are among the most environmentally protective 
places in New York City to live and work. 

To get this certification, a landowner must first perform a com-
prehensive evaluation of the property’s history and then perform 
chemical testing of soil, groundwater, and soil vapor. Environmental 
remediation under government oversight is required to ensure there 
will be no threat of exposure to any environmental contaminants. To 
symbolize this achievement, an NYC Green Property Certification 
plaque is provided to all certified properties. The plaque serves as a 
highly visible symbol of the positive environmental role land cleanup 
has played in the community. Since 2014, over 71 properties have 
received NYC Green Property Certification, and OER is on track to 
certify 750 properties in the next four years.

The City will establish the Brownfield Jumpstart 
Program to provide higher levels of City funding for 
environmental investigations and cleanup to unlock 
certain strategic brownfield properties that will be 
used for affordable housing and industrial 
development. We will also sponsor enrollment of 
these funded projects in the State BCP to enable State 
brownfield cleanup tax credits.

We will provide City funding to continue delivery of 
NYC Brownfield Incentive Grants (BIG) for 
brownfield investigation and cleanup to encourage 
enrollment in the NYC VCP. Currently, BIG provides 
numerous financial incentives to promote brownfield 
cleanup and redevelopment, but grant eligibility can 
be difficult for land owners and brownfield 
developers to understand. We will launch Financial 
Assistance Search Tool (FAST), a web application to 
help community-based organizations, community and 
private developers, and citizens find grants and loans 
for community brownfield planning, brownfield 
investigation, and cleanup in New York City.

Citywide Voluntary 
Cleanup Program 
(VCP) Sites

Affordable Housing Projects 
Enrolled VCP: 60

Sites Enrolled in VCP: 263

Source: NYC OER

File: 156_VCP_Affordable-150403.ai

196

DRAFT 04/03/2015 11:45 AM 

N

4 Miles

Brownfieldsnyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 2
Support community engagement by establishing 
additional place-based community brownfield 
planning areas

To ensure the City provides authentic engagement of communities, we 
currently support place-based community brownfield planning in low-income 
neighborhoods that have a disproportionately high occurrence of brownfields. 

Over the next four years, we will double the number of place-based 
community brownfield planning areas by designating twenty new 
neighborhoods and focusing our incentives to help them better identify 
strategic brownfield properties and implement community development 
projects. We will assist in the identification, cleanup, and redevelopment of 
community-supported projects on 40 properties in four years. 

For up to nine of these neighborhoods, we will assist community brownfield 
planning by preparing an existing conditions study to identify land uses and 
geographic and demographic conditions that will become a strong foundation 
for community brownfield planning. 

To build the capacity of community-based organizations to perform cleanup 
and prepare strategic properties for development, we will launch a Pro Bono 
Environmental Assistance Program with the NYC Brownfield Partnership to 
provide no-cost environmental expertise for community developers and 
brownfield planners interested in cleaning up and developing brownfield 
sites in New York City, and provide guidance on the use of these new 
resources to achieve community vision for brownfield properties.

The City will launch EPIC Community, a web application that will provide 
place-based community brownfield planning organizations with the means to 
communicate with each other, with city agencies, with local residents, and with 
developers working in their community. EPIC Community will also provide the 
ability to store and share data, reports, and other related documents. 

We will also launch SPEED2.0, an update to SPEED (Searchable Property 
Environmental Electronic Database), the City’s award-winning web mapping 
application and environmental research engine that combines City 
information on every property with a compilation of Federal, State, and City 
government environmental databases. 

CASE STUDY OF AFFORD-
ABLE HOUSING CLEANUP

New York City has established the 
NYC VCP and now offers a wide vari-
ety of incentives to promote the clean-
up of brownfields for development of 
affordable and supportive housing. To 
date, we have enrolled 60 projects for 
affordable housing in the NYC VCP 
that will produce over 3,850 new units 
of housing to serve over 12,000 New 
Yorkers. One such project is Norman 
Towers, an 18,000 square-foot proper-
ty at 161st Street in Jamaica, Queens. 
Prior to enrolling in the NYC VCP, 
this property was vacant and undevel-
oped. Cleanup of this site involved the 
removal of over 11,000 tons of soil and 
two leaking underground petroleum 
tanks, and placement of a plastic 
liner beneath the building to prevent 
leakage of underground vapors from 
the surrounding area. Cleanup at the 
property achieved the State’s highest 
cleanup standard, and the site was 
formally certified in the NYC Green 
Property Certification Program.

To assist site remediation in the 
NYC VCP, Norman Towers received 
$100,000 in environmental investi-
gation and cleanup funding from the 
NYC BIG Program. The affordable 
housing was funded by tax-exempt 
bond financing and low-income 
housing credits from the NYC Housing 
Development Corporation (HDC), 
state low-income housing credits from 
NYS Housing and Community Renew-
al, and program subsidy funds from 
HDC and NYC Housing Preservation 
and Development. Norman Towers 
is now a thriving 101-unit affordable 
housing apartment building with a 
mix of retail, office, and parking. Its 
affordable apartments are available to 
New Yorkers at a wide range of income 
levels, and the building is home to the 
new offices of the building’s developer, 
The Bluestone Organization, providing 
25 permanent jobs. 

197

Brownfieldsnyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Place-Based Community 
Brownfield Planning Areas

Established Areas

New Areas

Harlem River

Bradhurst/Harlem

East Harlem

Harlem Gateway

Newtown Creek

East Williamsburg
Broadway Triangle

Gowanus Canal Corridor
Red Hook/Gowanus

Red Hook

Sunset Park

West Brighton
Port Richmond

Stapelton

West Shore

NYC OER

Eastchester

Cromwell/Jerome
Port Morris

Zarega

South Bronx Waterfront

Flushing River Waterfront

Reclaim Bushwick
Ridgewood
Cypress Hills

Jamaica

Farmers Boulevard

East New York

Edgemere

DRAFT 04/06/2015 1:16 PM 

198

Brownfieldsnyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 3
Facilitate cleanup of properties in 100-year floodplain to 
reduce environmental risks from storm surges

Brownfields in low-lying waterfront areas present a greater risk from erosion as 
coastal flooding is projected to become more frequent. Flood waters can cause 
contaminants to be dispersed into surrounding communities, including environmental 
justice areas already overburdened with pollution. We will facilitate the 
environmental cleanup of 100 properties in the 100-year floodplain over the next four 
years to lower the contamination risk from future tidal storm surges.

To accelerate cleanup of flood-prone areas and improve public safety, we also 
expanded the BIG program to establish new small grants to support cleanup 
activities in the 100-year floodplain in the NYC VCP. 

In 2014, the City established new regulations to strengthen standards for cleanup of 
industrial properties on the waterfront. These new rules reduce the level of 
contaminants that can be left on these sites when cleanup is complete, and are 
intended to lessen the pollution impact of future storm surges on communities in 
coastal industrial areas.

We will expand our support for grassroots planning for climate resiliency by 
establishing four new community brownfield planning areas in neighborhoods 
heavily impacted by flooding during Hurricane Sandy. SPEED2.0 will also improve 
online access to maps of current and projected floodplains, wetlands, and emergency 
evacuation zones.

In 2014, we began performing free climate-change resiliency surveys of brownfield 
development plans for projects in the NYC VCP. These surveys are performed by 
knowledgeable building resiliency experts and are provided to brownfield developers to 
educate them on the most protective building design practices to lower vulnerability of 
both the buildings and the surrounding community to storm surge and other effects of 
climate change and about financial incentives available to help achieve these goals.

EPIC COMMUNITY

Place-based community 
brownfield planning is essen-
tial to engage the public and 
promote community-driven 
brownfield redevelopment. We 
plan to double the number of 
communities we serve, and will 
bring new tools and resources 
to help community brownfield 
planners identify strategic sites 
and achieve community-driv-
en redevelopment. One such 
tool is EPIC Community, a 
new web application that will 
bring state-of-the-art digital 
communications to community 
brownfield planners working in 
40 neighborhoods throughout 
the city. With EPIC Community, 
community brownfield planners 
will be able to work with each 
other in a well-coordinated 
network, reach more citizens in 
their communities, and easily 
communicate with government 
agencies and developers work-
ing on cleanup and redevel-
opment projects in their area. 
EPIC will provide discussion fo-
rums to share best practices and 
enable document sharing with 
peers. It will offer easy access 
to all work plans and reports 
for cleanup projects in the NYC 
VCP and provide notifications 
to keep community brownfield 
planners up-to-date on the latest 
developments on cleanup proj-
ects in their neighborhoods—
making the NYC VCP one of 
the most transparent cleanup 
programs in the country. 

N

4 Miles

199

Brownfieldsnyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City INDICATORS + TARGETS

 Maintain full compliance 
with Safe Drinking Water Act

 Maintain backlog of 
catch-basin repairs un-
der 1 percent. Backlog of 
catch-basin repairs reflects 
the state of good repair of 
the catch basin system and 
capacity to address flooding

 Increase the Combined 
Sewage Overflow (CSO) 
capture rate from 78  
percent in 2014

Water Management

Goal: New York City will mitigate neighborhood 
flooding and offer high-quality water services

Overview
Water is one of our most precious resources and must be valued and managed 
wisely. Water is essential to our daily life and public health. We must preserve New 
York’s water from contamination, the risks of aging infrastructure, and the impacts 
of climate change.

The New York City DEP operates one of the most complex water and wastewater 
systems in the world. It manages a network of 19 reservoirs and three controlled 
lakes that cover approximately 2,000 square miles of watershed land as far as 125 
miles upstate. The City’s drinking water system is the largest unfiltered water supply 
in the world, delivering approximately one billion gallons of high-quality drinking 
water each day to nine million New Yorkers.

New York City has approximately 7,000 miles of water mains and over 7,500 miles of sewer 
mains that incur substantial maintenance, replacement, and management costs. Fourteen 
large municipal WWTPs treat an average of 1.3 billion gallons of wastewater every day.

To safeguard this invaluable natural resource and more efficiently deliver critical 
water services, the City has adopted a holistic approach to water management. This 
is anchored in an understanding of local water cycles and an appreciation for the 
contributions of smaller-scale, decentralized projects aimed at optimizing the 
performance of existing large-scale systems. For example, the City has spent 
approximately $1.7 billion since the 1990s in watershed protection. These 
investments have helped protect our natural resources and ensure high-quality 
affordable drinking water, while also avoiding the need for an estimated $10 billion 
new filtration plant. Similarly, instead of exclusively relying on expensive, energy-
intensive traditional engineering controls to capture stormwater runoff, the City has 
adopted a Green Infrastructure program to construct and maintain curbside 
gardens—also known as bioswales and stormwater greenstreets—and has promoted 
other green infrastructure such as permeable paving, which absorbs stormwater 
before it enters the sewage system. 

Delivering high-quality drinking water, wastewater services, and stormwater 
management to residents of New York City requires substantial capital and 
operating investments. The City has been tracking and analyzing trends in 
population, water consumption, waterfront use, and changing environmental 
conditions. Although the cost of New York City’s water and wastewater services is 
below the national average, the cost of safeguarding drinking water quality and 

200

nyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City managing storm water is likely to increase. This is particularly hard to bear for 
low-income homeowners and providers of affordable housing. In order to balance 
the goals of investment and equity going forward, DEP will continue to develop rates 
that support policy goals, and will invest in the technology to support innovative fee 
structures. The City will update the water and wastewater billing system, and 
evaluate its financial framework to ensure we have a sustainable financial model.

We will continue to manage the city’s drinking water supply to maintain its world-
renowned drinking water quality. In addition, the City will manage its wastewater 
treatment, stormwater management, and drainage systems to improve the quality of 
our local waterways and beaches, as well as ensure every neighborhood receives a 
high level of infrastructure services.

Ashokan Revervoir, Catskill water 
supply system

Department of Environmental Protection

201

Water Managementnyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Water Supply
New York City is one of only five large cities in the country that has a surface 
drinking-water supply that does not require filtration as a form of treatment—
although the water is still disinfected to reduce microbial risk. The City’s next 
Filtration Avoidance Determination (FAD) is expected in 2017. The FAD is a Federal 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) ruling that allows the City to continue with 
the measures it currently uses to ensure clean drinking water rather than redoing its 
entire system and building a large, costly, energy-intensive filtration plant. Issuance 
of the FAD is not a given and requires comprehensive watershed evaluation and 
protection. 

The City must also meet increasingly stringent regulations and requirements for 
simultaneous compliance with the Clean Water Act and Safe Drinking Water Act to 
protect the quality of our drinking water and aquatic resources, as well as to protect 
recreational opportunities in our waterways.

In addition, since the 1990s, DEP has been monitoring leaks in a portion of the 
Delaware Aqueduct and identified two areas of significant leakage in the Rondout-
West Branch Tunnel portion of the Aqueduct. Together, these areas leak 
approximately 35 million gallons of water every day. Work is underway to construct 
a bypass tunnel and repair the leak.

Stormwater Management and Drainage
Local topography, dense urban development, the capacity of our aging sewer system, and 
increasingly extreme weather are some of the biggest contributing factors to flooding. 
Some communities throughout New York City, including sections of Queens, Staten Island, 
the Bronx, and Brooklyn, have been prone to flooding and drainage problems. 

Stormwater runoff is generated from rain and melting snow conveyed over impervious 
surfaces such as rooftops, streets, and sidewalks. Rather than being absorbed into the 
ground, water flows to catch-basins in the streets, and from there into the sewers. These 
impervious surfaces cover approximately 72 percent of New York City’s 305 square 
miles of land area. During wet-weather events, runoff from hard surfaces of the city can 
cause flooding, carry pollutants to waterways through the Municipal Separate Storm 
Sewer System (MS4), or overwhelm the combined sewer system leading to combined 
sewer overflows (CSO). As with many older cities, New York City has a drainage system 
that combines waste from buildings with stormwater in its combined sewers; the system 
can overflow with high volumes of stormwater. 

Different neighborhoods in New York City have different infrastructure 
requirements. The initiatives in this plan have been screened to address priority 
projects, as well as the need to improve on the delivery of infrastructure services 
while also addressing community levels of service.

202

Water Managementnyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 1
Protect the city’s water supply and 
maintain the reliability and resiliency 
of the water supply system

DEP received its first 10-year FAD in 2007. The 
10-year FAD represents a strong endorsement by our 
regulators that the City’s innovative strategy of 
source-water protection is an effective and 
sustainable approach to protecting water quality and 
public health. The longer time horizon also gives DEP 
and its many partners more certainty of the stability 
of the water supply protection programs and allows 
for more effective long-range planning, budgeting, 
and contracting. In preparation for the 2017 FAD, the 
City will compile a comprehensive summary of all 
program activities and an assessment of water quality 
status and trends.

The City is undertaking several major water 
infrastructure projects. We will construct a 
Kensico-Eastview Tunnel to provide necessary 
redundancy between the Kensico Reservoir and the 
Catskill-Delaware UV Treatment Facility to meet 
current and future flow requirements. DEP has also 
begun repairing the Delaware Aqueduct. The work 
necessary to construct a bypass tunnel beneath the 
Hudson River is proceeding ahead of schedule. 
Shutdown and repair of the leaking portion of the 
Delaware Aqueduct, i.e., the Rondout-West Branch 
Tunnel, is scheduled to begin in 2022.

The City will initiate a grant program of up to $1 
million per year through 2020 to encourage on-site 
water reuse on private properties. Potential 
applications include greywater, blackwater, and 
rainwater reuse in non-potable water processes such 
as toilet flushing, cooling tower waters, and irrigation. 
The program is part of the City’s broader water 
demand management efforts. The City will also 
examine its own regulatory and permitting processes, 
and update as required.

203

Bypass tunnel and shaft construction, 
Delaware Aqueduct

Water Managementnyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Water bottle refilling station  
and fountain

Initiative 2
Install or repair 500 water fountains and water bottle 
refilling stations across the five boroughs

Water is essential to all human physiologic processes, and maintaining proper 
hydration has numerous health benefits. Functioning and accessible water fountains 
promote healthy beverage habits among New Yorkers. Moreover, water is a healthy 
and free alternative to sugary drinks, the single largest source of added sugar in our 
diets. Sugary drinks provide no nutritional value, and have been linked to weight 
gain, type 2 diabetes, and heart disease. In our city, it is estimated that over half of 
adults consume sugary drinks on a daily basis.

Our water should be the first choice for quenching thirst in the home, workplace, or 
on the street. To encourage proper hydration and healthy water consumption, the City 
is committing to installing or repairing water fountains across the five boroughs. DEP 
will commit $5 million over the next ten years toward the goal of increasing water-
bottle filling fountains and stations to eliminate drinking water drought and reduce 
single-use plastic bottles across the city. 

There are also important environmental advantages to water fountains. Many 
fountains cannot be used to fill water bottles or are underused because filling is slow. 
This contributes to single plastic bottle use and adds to the costs and pollutant 
emissions associated with collecting, transporting, recycling, and disposing of the 
plastic bottles. We will promote drinking water and fountain use with signage and 
messaging to encourage water bottle refilling. 

To promote the new water fountains, the City will enlist the help of GreeNYC to launch 
a multi-media strategic marketing campaign that includes signage, out-of-home 
advertising (including subway, bus, and billboard), radio, and digital media. In addition, 
the City will launch or promote an existing phone app that allows residents and visitors 
to find water fountains and stations around the city. The City will also develop a plan to 
increase the number, quality, and popularity of water fountains in schools. 

Initiative 3
Expand green infrastructure and smart design for 
stormwater management in neighborhoods across the city

To alleviate the impact of storms on public infrastructure, DEP will work with 
partner agencies to institutionalize stormwater management into the design of 
public property, including streets, parks, schoolyards, and public housing. The City 
will also continue the NYC Green Infrastructure Program, including the installation 
of curbside garden bioswales and green infrastructure elements in parks, 
schoolyards and public housing, to manage one inch of rainfall on 10% of the 

204

Water Managementnyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Bioswales, Hutchinson Neighborhood  
Demonstration Area

impervious surfaces in areas served by the combined sewer 
system by 2030. The City will use demonstration projects to 
explore expanding the use of green infrastructure in other parts 
of the city served by the separate storm-sewer system. In 
addition, the City will assess and implement green infrastructure 
opportunities at municipal facilities.

To encourage more private property stormwater retrofits, the City 
will streamline or expand the existing Green Infrastructure Grant 
Program in areas served by the combined sewer system or both.  
It will also conduct a study to assess new private property 
stormwater-retrofit incentive programs to strengthen or expand 
the effectiveness of the existing stormwater performance standard 
through institutional controls.

Supporting Initiative
A. Alleviate flooding in Southeast Queens

DEP is developing an action plan to resolve long-standing flooding 
conditions that affect over 400,000 city residents in Southeast 
Queens. The area has more 311 flooding and confirmed sewer 
backup complaints than any other area of the city, and in certain 
neighborhoods, experiences recurring flooding conditions. The 
plan will consist of intensive and accelerated long-term sewer 
build-out, complemented with innovative, site-specific solutions, 
such as Bluebelts and green infrastructure. It will serve as a model 
for other flood-prone neighborhoods of the city.

Initiative 4
Reduce pollution from stormwater runoff

The DEP is developing a comprehensive plan to address pollution 
from the MS4 and improve water quality. This citywide plan will 
include, among other things, adopting measures for public outreach 
and involvement, finding and eliminating illicit sewer connections, 
managing stormwater during and after construction, managing 
industrial/commercial stormwater sources, controlling floatables, 
and adopting pollution prevention practices for municipal facilities.

Plastic bags and other litter in our waterways are a major concern for 
the City. Therefore, as part of the citywide stormwater management 
plan, the City will conduct a study to identify sources of floatables (i.e., 
trash) carried to waterways by stormwater, and implement a program 
to reduce these floatables. In addition, we will launch a citywide 
media campaign for floatables, settleable trash, and debris reduction.

205

Water Managementnyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City INDICATOR + TARGET

 Increase percent of New 
Yorkers living within walk-
ing distance to a park from 
79.5 percent to 85 percent 
by 2030

Parks & Natural Resources

Goal: All New Yorkers will benefit from useful, 
accessible, and beautiful open spaces 

Overview
A high-quality, easily accessible open space is a foundation of vibrant 
neighborhoods. It is part of the city’s public realm and includes all outdoor spaces, 
such as our city’s parks, public spaces, streets, and natural habitats, which together 
make up more than 40 percent of New York City’s land area. As an integrated 
system, a great open space can attract residents and businesses, and promote greater 
use of recreational, civic, cultural, and natural resources. 

All New Yorkers experience open spaces every day—whether on the street, in a park, 
or just looking out the window. Access to high-quality outdoor spaces, streets, and 
sidewalks produces tangible benefits. Parks and public space are essential to 
economic development, civic engagement, and community revitalization, promoting 
interaction with neighbors, attracting visitors, and providing a venue for art and 
culture. In addition, these resources have significant public health and 
environmental benefits, providing active and passive recreation opportunities, 
reducing pollution, and helping to minimize the impact of climate change.

New York City strives to make its open spaces more useful, accessible, and 
beautiful. To accomplish this, we will develop a data-driven improvement strategy 
to ensure a deep understanding of existing assets and then make targeted 
investments to deliver the greatest benefits to the most New Yorkers. 

Many of New York City’s parks and public spaces were designed 50 or 100 years ago 
and now require significant investment to meet changing demands, including new 
patterns of development, demographic trends, and park users’ interests. 
Unfortunately, both the quantity and quality of these resources vary, with too many 
New Yorkers lacking access to neighborhood parks and more than 200 parks having 
received less than $250,000 each in capital investment over the last 20 years.

Beautiful parks and public spaces improve quality of life, attracting residents and 
businesses to New York City. In addition, enhancements to our city’s natural 
environment generate environmental benefits, including reduced pollution and 
improved stormwater management and flood resiliency. These resources help 
reduce stress, lower asthma rates, improve focus and mood, and, for children, are 
related to improved academic performance. 

206

nyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Prospect Park

Investment in open spaces has often been disjointed, resulting in disparate projects 
with their own distinct priorities. By planning for the city’s open spaces as a unified 
system, we can increase quality and efficiency, enhance park access, and improve 
neighborhood connections. A more cohesive and coordinated strategy will target 
high-impact projects to underserved neighborhoods, improve access to recreational 
amenities, and bring the beauty of our parks to other public spaces, including streets, 
sidewalks, and pedestrian plazas.

Significant investment, directed by a data-driven, equity-focused framework, is 
needed to ensure that the quality of our open space keeps pace with the city’s 
growing population and changing needs.

207

Parks & Natural Resourcesnyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 1
Strengthen the utility of parks and public space in under-
resourced and growing neighborhoods

Released in October 2014, NYC Parks: Framework for an Equitable Future set forth a 
strategy to invest capital, programming, and maintenance resources in parks where 
the need is greatest. This data-driven, equity-based approach identifies parks that 
have received little capital investment and are located in areas of high need, based 
on higher-than-average poverty, density, and recent population growth, to ensure 
investment in projects that will produce the most benefits for New Yorkers.

Through the Community Parks Initiative, New York City Department of Parks and 
Recreation (NYC Parks) has already launched major capital investments in 35 small parks 
with the input of local residents. The City will expand the Initiative to include additional 
sites, with the goal of impacting more than three million New Yorkers across 24 
community districts, focused on low-income, growing, and high-density neighborhoods.

South Oxford Park, Fort Greene

To expand NYC Parks’ ability to prioritize essential capital projects across the park 
system for repair and strategic investment, a new capital needs assessment will be 
developed to generate information about asset conditions and capital needs.

Initiative 2
Improve open spaces through Parks 
Without Borders, a new strategy to 
enhance neighborhood access and 
connectivity

Parks Without Borders is a new effort to make our city’s 
outdoor spaces more welcoming, accessible, and better 
connected to surrounding neighborhoods. 

The quality of a city’s outdoor space depends on an 
integrated system in which parks, sidewalks, pedestrian 
plazas, and other open spaces are connected to each 
other, improving access to neighborhood resources and 
promoting community interaction.  

To make Parks Without Borders a reality, NYC Parks will 
take a new approach to park entrances and boundaries 
where they most directly interact with the surrounding 
community. NYC Parks will improve fences and gates and 
add other amenities, such as public art and landscaping, to 
make entrances more inviting. Along park boundaries, we 

208

Father Demo Square

Parks & Natural Resourcesnyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City will identify opportunities to remove or reduce fencing and barrier vegetation in order 
to make the natural beauty of parks more visible from their neighborhoods.  

As part of Parks Without Borders, NYC Parks, in cooperation with DOT and other 
agencies, will also find new ways to bring the beauty of the park into the community by 
greening key intersections and entrances, and by identifying new opportunities to 
activate underused public spaces with temporary art and programming. We will also look 
for opportunities to extend park amenities to adjacent sidewalks and pedestrian plazas.

Parks Without Borders is a key strategy to help ensure the livability of 
neighborhoods and the strength of our communities.

Initiative 3
Reduce light pollution from large buildings at night

Light pollution exists in every borough and is worse in areas with many commercial 
office buildings and unshielded exterior lighting. It has a detrimental impact on the 
quality of life, according to complaints registered with 311. Moreover, studies suggest 
light pollution has a detrimental effect on animal migratory patterns. The Hudson 
River is one of the most important migratory flyways for birds in North America, and 
New York City’s parks and ponds are favorite rest stops. Twice a year, New York City is 
one of the great places to see rare birds and a favorite destination for birdwatchers. 
Light pollution from buildings, however, interferes with migrations. 

In addition, light pollution is also linked to inefficient use of energy, which 
contributes to greenhouse gas emissions. Offices and retail spaces that are empty at 
night yet leave the lights on both create light pollution and waste energy. 

Municipalities in Massachusetts, California, Connecticut, and Arizona have successfully 
reduced light pollution and even increased the ability to view the night’s sky, ultimately 
helping to preserve the natural environment and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 

The City Council recently introduced the Lights Out Bill (Intro. 578/2014) to require 
vacant offices and retail spaces to shut off their lights at night. The City will work 
with the Council to pass a version of this bill that reduces energy-wasting light 
pollution from large buildings. In 2009, the City enacted Local Law 88 (LL88) 
requiring upgrades to lighting in all non-residential spaces of large buildings. This 
requires office and retail spaces to comply with current Energy Code standards by 
2025. With full compliance with the law, the city can expect to reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions by approximately an additional two percent from 2005 levels.  
Through the existing Retrofit Accelerator Program (discussed earlier in Vision 3), 
the City can assist building owners through loans and incentives to comply with 
LL88 lighting upgrades and install modern lighting and controls.

209

Light emanating from  
office building at night

Parks & Natural Resourcesnyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 4
Expand the use of our streets as places to play, congregate, 
and be together

To better serve our neighborhoods, the City will continue to work with communities 
and other partners to convert underused streets into pedestrian plazas and explore 
ways to transform underused areas below elevated roads and train lines to more 
attractive and inviting public spaces. Programs like Weekend Walks, Play Streets, 
and Summer Streets will continue to provide more opportunities for New Yorkers of 
all ages to get outdoors and into the public realm.

Children taking advantage of the 
city’s Play Streets

210

Parks & Natural Resourcesnyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 5
Create beautiful and well-tended streets in neighborhoods 
across the city 

To further improve our streets and sidewalks, we will invest in new street trees and 
other plantings, benches, way-finding signs, and other amenities. We will focus on 
rezoned and growing neighborhoods. As part of our street safety and affordable 
housing initiatives, the City will also invest in streetscape improvements on major 
corridors, such as landscaped medians, to improve pedestrian safety and the urban 
environment. Two new City programs will bring technical assistance and other 
resources to improve plaza maintenance and the condition of planted medians in 
low-to-moderate income or otherwise under-resourced communities.

211

Parks & Natural Resourcesnyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 6
Green the city’s streets, parks, and open spaces

To protect, maintain, and enhance the city’s green canopy, NYC Parks will continue 
to plant new trees in parks and neighborhoods citywide. Greening the public realm 
brings new beauty to our parks and neighborhoods, sustains ecological diversity, and 
adds permeable areas that enhance stormwater management. These natural systems 
provide valuable environmental benefits to all residents, including passive indoor 
and outdoor cooling; cleaning of air, water, and soil; and improved resiliency to 
natural events and climate change—true public health and quality-of-life benefits. 

The City will be guided in these efforts by a number of research initiatives designed 
to ensure a better understanding of ecosystems, natural resources, and how they 
benefit New Yorkers and improve air and water quality. Research initiatives include 
an update to the City’s state-of-the-art street tree census and an ecological and 
social assessment of the city’s natural areas, conducted in partnership with the 
Natural Areas Conservancy. 

The City will  also use LiDAR technology—land cover mapping based on aerial remote 
imaging. LiDAR technology helps inform policy decisions among different agencies 
and policy areas.  For instance, past LiDAR data has been used by the City to assess 
ecosystem decline and prioritize tree planting and forest restoration; impervious 
surface cover for green infrastructure planning; the solar energy potential of rooftops; 
and coastal flood hazards. The landscape of the city has changed since we last used 
LiDAR data in 2010 due to natural forces and human interventions, and new data will 
help to inform our understanding of and investment in the City’s resiliency and 
sustainability. The City is currently working to secure 2013 LiDAR data from the 
federal government.  

Expansion of the East River 
Esplanade 

212

Parks & Natural Resourcesnyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Environmental Education

 
The City will continue to provide environmental literacy programs to support the next gen-
eration of environmental stewards and to ensure widespread awareness of the environmental 
impact of OneNYC sustainability initiatives.  

Several City agencies—including DOE, DEP, and Parks— offer environmental literacy pro-
grams. The City is supported in this work by hundreds of non-profit organizations, including 
Jamaica Bay Science and Resilience Center, GrowNYC, the Horticultural Society of New York, 
and 1,800 park stewardship groups. 

These education programs equip both students and teachers with the tools they need to be-
come engaged community and environmental stewards. The Natural Classroom, NYC Parks’ 
environmental education program for students in grades K-8, is a series of inquiry-based, 
hands-on programs led by the Urban Park Rangers and developed in partnership with Nation-
al Geographic and Columbia University. NYC Parks also offers free instruction and resources 
in neighborhood tree care. These efforts support the investments made in improving the city’s 
urban forest, and works with partner organizations to provide hundreds of hands-on stew-
ardship opportunities each year. The DEP Office of Education also provides a range of free 
programs and resources—pertaining to water and wastewater, green infrastructure, sound 
and noise, environmental stewardship, and climate change—and will soon offer complemen-
tary online teacher and student resources.

Watershed Classroom

213

Parks & Natural Resourcesnyc.gov/onenycVision 3One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Vision 4 

Our  
Resilient City

Our neighborhoods, economy, and public 
services will be ready to withstand and emerge 
stronger from the impacts of climate change 
and other 21st century threats

New York City will...

  Eliminate disaster-related long-term displacement more 

than one year of New Yorkers from homes by 2050

  Reduce the Social Vulnerability Index for 

neighborhoods across the city

  Reduce average annual economic losses resulting from 

climate-related events

214

nyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Goals

Neighborhoods
Every city neighborhood will be safer by strengthening community, social,  
and economic resiliency

Buildings
The city’s buildings will be upgraded against changing climate impacts

Infrastructure
Infrastructure systems across the region will adapt to maintain continued services

Coastal Defense
New York City’s coastal defenses will be strengthened against flooding and sea level rise 

215

nyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Introduction
In late October 2012, Hurricane Sandy roared into New York Harbor with 
unprecedented force, causing record-breaking water levels. Many neighborhoods were 
devastated, with homes and businesses becoming flooded, public services interrupted, 
and infrastructure damaged. After the storm passed and the water receded, a new 
reality emerged: New Yorkers must confront the implications of living in a coastal city. 

Sandy claimed the lives of 44* New Yorkers and caused $19 billion in damages and lost 
economic activity. It also highlighted the vulnerability of New York City—as well as the 
entire region—to the risks posed by coastal storms. As the city counted the costs and 
pushed ahead with a robust recovery effort, a new conversation began: Recovery must 
also result in a city better able to face a wider range of risks—not just the “next Sandy.”

The first of these risks is climate change. Rising sea levels, increased 
temperatures and precipitation, and a growing likelihood of more intense storms 
pose unique challenges to a coastal city like ours. In 2015, the New York City Panel 
on Climate Change (NPCC) released an updated set of climate projections for the 
region. Among its findings, the report noted that sea level rise for New York City, 
which had averaged 1.2 inches per decade (a total of 1.1 feet since 1900), is nearly 
twice the observed global rate over a similar time period. 

Climate change projections through 2100
2020s

  Chronic Hazards

Baseline  
(1971-2000)

Middle Range

High End

Middle Range

High End

Middle Range

High End

Middle Range

High End

2050s

2080s

2100

Average 
Temperature

Precipitation

Sea Level Rise

	  

  Extreme Events

Number of days per year with 

maximum temperature at or above 

90 °F

Heat Waves & 
Cold Events

Number of heat waves per year

Average duration in days

Number of days per year with 

minimum temperature at or below 

32 °F

Intense 

Precipitation 

Days per year with rainfall 

exceeding 2 inches

54°F

+2.0 to 2.8 °F

+3.2 °F

+4.1 to 5.7 °F

+6.6 °F

+5.3 to 8.8 °F

+10.3 °F

+5.8 to 10.3 °F

+12.1 °F

50.1 in.

+1 to 8%

+11%

+4 to 11%

+13%

+5 to 13%

+19%

-1 to +19%

+25%

Baseline  
(2000-2004)

2020s

Middle Range

High End

2050s

Middle Range

High End

2080s

Middle Range

High End

2100

Middle Range

High End

0

+4 to 8 in.

+10 in.

+11 to 21 in.

+30 in.

+18 to 39 in.

+58 in.

+22 to 50 in.

+75 in.

Baseline  
(1971-2000)

2020s

2050s

2080s

2100

Middle Range

High End

Middle Range

High End

Middle Range

High End

Middle Range

High End

18

2

4

71

3

26 to 31

3 to 4

5

52 to 58

3 to 4

33

4

5

60

5

39 to 52

5 to 7

5 to 6

42 to 48

4

57

7

6

52

5

44 to 76

6 to 9

5 to 7

30 to 42

4 to 5

87

9

8

49

5

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Baseline  
(2000-2004)

2020s

2050s

2080s

2100

Middle Range

High End

Middle Range

High End

Middle Range

High End

Middle Range

High End

Coastal Floods at 

the Battery

Future annual frequency of today's 

100-year flood 

Flood heights (feet) associated with 

100-year flood 

1%

11.3

1.1 to 1.4%

1.5%

1.6 to 2.4%

3.6%

2.0 to 5.4%

12.7%

11.6 to 12.0

12.1

12.2 to 13.1

13.8

12.8 to 14.6

16.1

-

-

-

-

Source: New York City Panel on  
Climate Change, 2015

*In June 2013, the City published A Stronger, More Resilient New York, which identified 43 Sandy-related 
fatalities in New York City. In July 2013, the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner classified one additional 
fatality as Sandy-related, bringing the total to 44.

216

nyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City DEFINITIONS

When we speak of resiliency, 
we are referring to the ability 
of people, the places where 
they live, and our infrastructure 
systems—such as transportation 
and energy—to withstand a 
stress or shock event, to recover, 
and emerge even stronger. 
Mitigation reduces the impact 
of a stress or shock event or 
prevents the impact altogether, 
such as bolstering the defenses 
of coastal communities to 
withstand flooding. In response 
to future threats, adaptation 
takes place to change the 
physical form or function 
of a structure, a place, or a 
community, such as hardening 
power supplies to withstand 
the effects of extreme weather 
and a changing climate. 

“Sandy made it clear that 
Jamaica Bay communities 
need flood protection. 
The City should 
coordinate with state and 
federal agencies to make 
sure coastal projects for 
this area are funded and 
move forward.”

—Roger W.,  
West Hamilton Beach

According to the middle range of these projections, sea levels are expected to rise 11 
inches to 21 inches by the 2050s, and 22 to 50 inches by 2100. Using the highest 
estimate of current projections, sea levels could rise as much as six feet by 2100. With 
this projected rise in sea level, the city’s floodplain will continue to expand, creating 
more frequent and intense flooding, and underscoring the city’s growing vulnerability 
to the many impacts of climate change. For instance, a similar Sandy-like event in 
2050 could cause $90 billion in damage and lost economic activity—compared to 
Sandy’s $19 billion—due to the rise in sea level alone.

As outlined in the City’s recent report, NYC’s Risk Landscape: A Guide to Hazard 
Mitigation, an additional set of natural hazards like winter weather, water shortages, 
earthquakes, and pandemics all pose risks to the city—as do human-induced hazards. 

Next, an evolving economy means we can no longer rely on the same sectors 
for job growth, or to comprise the city’s tax base. Climate change endangers both 
small businesses and commercial corridors in our coastal communities. A diversified 
economy, as detailed in Vision 1, is vital to maintaining the city’s economic resiliency, 
and enables those impacted by emergencies to recover more quickly. 

Finally, growing economic inequality poses challenges to the city’s social fabric. 
Inequality threatens to disrupt the connections between our neighbors, institutions, 
and communities that we rely on in times of crisis, prolonged stress, and difficult life 
events. Without these connections, recovery becomes even more difficult.

Over the years, New York City has been no stranger to shocks and stresses. For 
instance, in the years between the attacks of 9/11 and the 2014 Ebola infections, 
the city has endured, among other traumas, two hurricanes, a global economic 
downturn, and an earthquake. In each case, New Yorkers have joined together to 
face these challenges and come back stronger. In other words, New Yorkers 
have been resilient.

Since Hurricane Sandy, New York City has strengthened its commitment to 
resiliency. We are in the vanguard of a new global movement that is changing the 
way cities respond to 21st century threats, both acute and chronic. In partnership 
with 100 Resilient Cities (an organization pioneered by the Rockefeller 
Foundation dedicated to fostering the resiliency of cities), New York City will 
continue to lead the way toward a more resilient  future. And with half of the 
world’s population now living in cities, and two-thirds expected to live in cities by 
2050, it is more urgent than ever for New York City to demonstrate global 
leadership in  developing and utilizing the tools that will make all of us more 
resilient against future risks.

What we seek to accomplish now is to build a stronger, more resilient New York 
City—one that is ready for anything. This means we will continue to strengthen our 
communities, work to reduce the impacts of the risks we face, and improve 
recovery times when the unexpected happens. The future of New York City will 
indeed be resilient. 

217

nyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City To achieve this vision, New York City must adapt. A growing population, aging 
infrastructure, an evolving economy, and increasing economic inequality will 
continue to challenge our ability to adapt. But the news is not all bad. The right 
investments can be leveraged to strengthen communities while we rebuild. It is 
understood that every dollar invested in risk mitigation can repay itself four or 
more times over in future damages avoided. With the funds available after Sandy, 
the City has a unique opportunity to buy down future risk—that is, to invest now by 
working with communities, upgrading buildings, protecting infrastructure, and 
reducing flood risks—to enhance the city's resiliency. In fact, building on the City’s 
comprehensive $20 billion climate resiliency program, we will advance that 
program, expand our efforts, and prepare our city for the impacts of climate change 
and other 21st century threats. 

The Evolution of the City's Resiliency Program 
 
The City’s vision for resiliency and climate adaptation is rooted in nearly a decade of 
innovative and proactive planning that commenced with the release of A Greener, Greater 
New York in 2007. In June 2013, the City released its comprehensive climate resiliency plan A 
Stronger, More Resilient New York that outlined a 10-year, over $20 billion program with 257 
initiatives for adapting the city’s infrastructure systems and its hardest-hit neighborhoods 
after Hurricane Sandy. A Stronger, More Resilient New York provides a detailed analysis of 
what occurred to New York City’s communities, buildings, infrastructure, and coastlines 
during Sandy and sets forth a risk assessment that informs our program to prepare for a 
future with climate change. 

As part of the city's recovery from Sandy, Build it Back, run by the Mayor's Office of Housing 
Recovery Operations and supported by federal funding, was established in 2013 to oversee 
housing recovery in New York City. To provide financial or construction assistance to those 
in need, Build it Back developed several programs, integrating lessons from other disaster 
recovery programs. Houses that were substantially damaged were elevated or, in some cases, 
completely reconstructed. Houses that suffered moderate damage were offered financial and 
construction assistance for repairs, including reimbursement for those repairs completed in 
the first year after Sandy. Home acquisitions and repairs to multi-family buildings are also 
underway. Over 20,000 residents applied and nearly 12,000 applications are currently active.

In April 2014, the City committed to enhancing and expanding the resiliency and housing 
recovery programs with the release of One City, Rebuilding Together. This report created the 
Office of Recovery and Resiliency, which is dedicated to advancing the City’s resiliency vision. 
It also implemented critical improvements, including expedited reimbursement checks and 
more construction starts, to the Build it Back program and expanded economic opportunities 
for residents impacted by Sandy, such as the expansion of Sandy Recovery Workforce1, and 
developing a pipeline for pre-apprenticeship programs in the construction trades. 

To date, Build it Back has sent out over 3,200 reimbursement checks and started construction 
on over 1,100 homes, of which more than 500 were already completed. 

The appendix of this report describes our current progress on the City’s resiliency program.

218

The City of New York
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A  STRONGER, 
MORE RESILIENT 
NEW YORK

ONE CITY, REBUILDING TOGETHER

A Report on the City of New York’s Response to Hurricane Sandy and the Path Forward

Prepared by:
William Goldstein, Senior Advisor for Recovery, Resiliency and Infrastructure
Amy Peterson, Director of the Housing Recovery Office
Daniel A. Zarrilli, Director of the Mayor’s Office of Recovery and Resiliency

APRIL 2014

One City, Rebuilding Together

1

nyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City What’s New in the OneNYC 

A comprehensive climate resiliency plan for New York City was announced in June 2013 and 
continues to serve as the roadmap for the city’s climate adaptation efforts. With OneNYC, the 
City expands and accelerates that roadmap to build a stronger, more resilient New York City 
with several new concepts and focus areas, including:

Community Strengthening 
This plan enhances the focus on strengthening communities by building the community, social, 
and economic resiliency of our neighborhoods. It will include a new emphasis on deepening 
resident, non-profit, and business participation in emergency planning, and exploring social 
cohesion as a strategy for resiliency, which would include forming a task force to study the 
role of community institutions, like houses of worship and community-based organizations, in 
resiliency planning.

New Climate Projections 
The City is committed to using the best available scientific knowledge to inform its policy. In 
2015, the NPCC released Building the Knowledge Base for Climate Resiliency, which included 
updated climate projections and recommendations on climate indicators and monitoring  
protocols. New topics covered in this report include public health, with a focus on extreme 
heat events and coastal storms, and enhanced dynamic coastal flood modeling, which incor-
porate the effects of sea level rise. 

Focus on Heat 
Based on the NPCC's work, the City is putting a new emphasis on protecting New York-
ers from acute and chronic heat, including an urban heat island working group, efforts to           
understand the need for better ambient air temperature data collection across the city, and an 
analysis of natural infrastructure and its impact on the urban heat island effect.

Land Use Policy 
The City’s 2013 climate resiliency plan recommended further study into how land use policy 
can be a tool for resiliency. Ten neighborhoods impacted by Sandy across the city are current-
ly involved in planning studies to generate resiliency recommendations and land use changes, 
on both a local and citywide level. These recommendations are expected to reduce long-term 
vulnerability by smartly managing growth and development in vulnerable parts of the city. 

An Updated Federal Agenda 
Since 2013, the federal government has reformed the National Flood Insurance Program 
(NFIP), slowing increases in insurance premiums, but failing to solve the problem of long-term 
insurance affordability. NFIP is expected to be reauthorized in 2017, providing a unique oppor-
tunity to institute new reforms. In advance of reauthorization, the City continues to evaluate a 
variety of policy changes and outcomes that provide incentives for risk-reduction investments 
and promote affordability. At the same time, the city’s flood maps are being updated, showing 
that more of the city is vulnerable to flooding. Finally, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (US-
ACE) has released its two-year North Atlantic Coast Comprehensive Study, recommending fur-
ther action to reduce coastal vulnerability in the city. The City will continue its work to ensure 
that the USACE is able to launch a new feasibility study in New York Harbor and its tributaries. 
This study is expected to lead to new authorized projects ready for construction.

219

nyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Resiliency Indicators
To measure our progress, the City will continue to consider ways to measure the impacts of 
its resiliency efforts. The field of resiliency does not yet have a rigorous standard for indi-
cators and performance measures, but the City will commit to creating a methodology to 
develop and test indicators for resiliency. This might include simple metrics, scenario analysis 
tools, or computational modeling techniques to determine whether and how the City is im-
proving its resiliency. To implement a specific set of monitoring tools, the City will continue 
its work with 100 Resilient Cities.

In order to advance Vision 4 effectively, the City has identified the following indicators 
through which we can monitor our progress. This Vision aims to reduce or eliminate the 
following:

Eliminate disaster-related long-term displacement (more than one year) of New Yorkers from 
homes by 2050

 
Reduce the Social Vulnerability Index for neighborhoods across the city

 
Reduce average annual economic losses resulting from climate-related events

220

nyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Neighborhood Spotlight

In the Bronx River Corridor, the City is working with local communities 
to plan for a more resilient future. This includes a range of investments 
and planning initiatives to prepare of the impacts of climate change and 
other 21st century threats. 

C

6

A

B

C

BRONX RIVER

B

A

EAST RIVER

Hunts Point Resiliency 
Investing in coastal and energy  
resiliency, in partnership with 
local business and resident  
stakeholders, can protect critical 
assets and supply chains while  
creating new community 
amenities. 

Harding Park Resilient  
Neighborhoods Study 
Planning with the Harding Park 
community about the area’s short- 
and long-term resiliency aims 
to mitigate the risks of coastal 
flooding for this vibrant bungalow 
community.

Bronx River Shoreline at  
Starlight Park 
Creating wetlands, soil cleanup, 
and ecosystem restoration will 
protect and strengthen an existing 
community asset. 

221

nyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City SOUNDVIEWPARKCROTONAPARKBRONXPARKSHERIDAN EXPYCROSS-BRONX EXPYBRUCKNER EXPYBRONX RIVER PKWYSOUTHERN BLVD180TH STTREMONT AVECROTONAPARK EASTHUNTS POINTLONGWOODPARKCHESTERWESTFARMSSHERIDAN EXPYCROSS-BRONX EXPYBRUCKNER EXPYBRONX RIVER PKWY180TH STTREMONT AVENeighborhoods

Goal: Every city neighborhood will be safer by 
strengthening community, social, and economic 
resiliency

INDICATORS + TARGETS

 Increase the capacity of 
accessible emergency 
shelters to 120,000
 Increase the rate of 
volunteerism among  
New Yorkers to 25 percent  
by 2020

Overview
New Yorkers come together during emergencies to support each other and begin the 
recovery process. And while significant disruptive events like Hurricane Sandy 
affect all New Yorkers, they ultimately expose and exacerbate underlying 
vulnerabilities in many communities. Across every corner of the city, everyday New 
Yorkers, along with local institutions, energize the recovery process and voluntarily 
help their neighbors without waiting for official assistance. In short, these residents, 
organizations, and community leaders anchor neighborhood recovery, and continue 
to provide support long after official resources are no longer available.

Unquestionably, official resources are vital for community preparedness. One of the 
most critical components to disaster preparedness and response is effective 
communication between government and community stakeholders. This means the 
City must continue to work with local organizations before disasters strike. By 
establishing communication links; emergency on-call contracting authorities; 
off-the-shelf recovery programs for communities, residents, and businesses; disaster 
recovery assets, and strengthened shelter services, we can be better prepared. 
Additionally, as medium- and long-term recovery proceeds, the City must work with 
local communities to address the lingering effects of disasters on residents, 
businesses, and communities, all of which require new efforts to ensure recovery 
doesn’t stall when attention turns elsewhere.

The strengthening of social networks and planning within a community are also 
critical to enhancing resiliency. This can entail building relationships with, and 
checking in on, neighbors and the availability of adequate neighborhood gathering 
and resource centers. How New Yorkers interact with one another can be an 
important factor in guarding against many risks. Heat, for example, presents a 
unique challenge to New York City. As we learned during the Chicago heat wave of 
1995, neighborhoods with more robust social infrastructure, such as community 
centers, safe streets, and schools had better health outcomes than those without. 
And as mean annual temperatures in New York City are projected to increase by 4.1° 
to 5.7°F by the 2050s, neighborhoods without social networks and infrastructure are 
at an even greater risk, particularly where heat-vulnerable populations, such as 
children and seniors, are increasing.

222

nyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Finally, because communities can’t do this all on their own, it is important that the City’s 
emergency communication and preparedness programs, in partnership with 
communities, maintain their ability to respond to any disaster. As the city has seen, it is 
vital for first-responders and other essential personnel to be able to have emergency 
access to restricted areas: response and recovery operations, logistics and support zones, 
and critical emergency facilities. The opportunities that come from long-term recovery 
operations ensure residents impacted by disasters are able to participate in the recovery 
of their neighborhoods through hiring programs and workforce development. 

Sandy Recovery Opportunity and 
Resource Fair at the Challenge 
Preparatory Charter School in 
Queens

Community Resiliency in Red Hook 
 
The morning after Hurricane Sandy hit Red Hook, Sheryl Nash-
Chisholm, a resident of Red Hook Houses,  decided to check 
on her place of employment, the Red Hook Initiative (RHI), a 
community-based organization serving Red Hook in Brooklyn. 
Once inside, she realized that RHI had not been damaged by the 
storm. She immediately opened the center to serve as a gathering 
place, charging station, and supply-distribution center. By 
taking this initiative, Sheryl became a key part of the Red Hook 
community's recovery. 

For the next three weeks, Sheryl and two dozen neighbors worked 
tirelessly to serve their community, returning each night to their 
own apartments that were still without heat, running water, and 
electricity. RHI was open for up to 14 hours per day during those 
three weeks, with RHI volunteers and partner organizations 
providing supplies and meals to thousands of area residents, as 
well as free Wi-Fi and legal and/or medical assistance to nearly 
300 home-bound people in the community. With long-lasting local 
relationships and community awareness, RHI and their partners 
demonstrated that community-based organizations and their 
members are often able to mobilize quickly and provide meaningful, 
critical support for neighborhoods in times of crisis. 

Sheryl Nash-Chisholm

223

Neighborhoodsnyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 1
Strengthen community-based organizations

Social infrastructure plays an important role in making communities ready for the 
unexpected, and neighborhoods vary in the level of social cohesion and available 
resources. To address this situation, the City will work to build capacity in 
communities by strengthening community-based organizations that serve their 
neighbors and by working to expand civic engagement and volunteerism.  

First, the City will seek to develop a comprehensive, interactive web-based platform 
to map both small and large community organizations and activities, as well as local 
government services and initiatives, across New York City. The platform will allow 
for the identification of both gaps and duplication of efforts, as well as opportunities 
for integrating existing community-based and government initiatives. It will also 
encourage more effective coordination, collaboration, and decision-making in these 
efforts, in addition to linking to tools for connecting organizations and aiding in 
community-based emergency planning between government and communities. 

Next, the City will seek to bolster neighborhood resiliency and civic participation by 
strengthening community-based organizations’ services, information capacity, and 
ability to conduct community-level emergency and resiliency planning. The City will 
study a model for social empowerment zones, which aim to increase residents' 
resiliency in under-resourced neighborhoods by targeting funds and capacity-
building support to critical local service providers in geographically defined areas.

In partnership with the City Council, the City will establish a Hurricane Sandy Task 
Force to make recommendations on expanding the participation of community-

based organizations and faith-based groups in local 
emergency planning and resiliency efforts.

Finally, the City will expand volunteerism 
opportunities in neighborhood-based initiatives run 
by community-based organizations, neighborhood 
institutions, and the City. An enhanced NYC Service 
platform will connect organizations and programs in 
need of support with available volunteers, including 
linking volunteers with emergency response and 
recovery efforts. 

A Community Emergency 
Response Team (CERT) volunteer 
spreads the word about the City's 
"Know Your Zone" campaign

224

Neighborhoodsnyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 2
Improve emergency preparedness and planning

Resiliency starts with preparation. Securing physical assets for emergency 
response such as a power generators, light towers and others are a critical first 
step. The City, through NYC Emergency Management (NYC EM), will expand 
public education efforts so that all New Yorkers know the risks they face during 
extreme weather events and other disasters, and how to prepare and respond.

The City will invest in emergency shelter sites to accommodate 120,000 New 
Yorkers with disabilities—an improvement on the current capacity of 10,000—and 
will retrofit shelters to have accessible entrances, restrooms, and other aspects of 
universal design. We will strive to ensure vulnerable populations that need shelter 
are provided with adequate transportation services. The City will also continue 
working to identify additional accessible sites throughout the five boroughs that can 
serve as emergency service centers.

During large-scale emergencies and disasters, getting the right resources to the right 
place at the right time saves lives and helps New Yorkers recover faster. The City can 
ensure this happens by expanding the existing Corporate Emergency Access System 
(CEAS), a program recognized by New York City Police Department (NYPD) and 
NYC EM that allows emergency access for businesses, into an emergency access 
credential for City Agency staff and other essential personnel. The City will convene 
an inter-agency working group to evaluate, and make recommendations for, the 
development of this credential and its procedures during a disaster.

In the summer of 2014, the City launched a comprehensive review of its 911 
emergency response system. The first assessment examined the technological and 
facilities improvements already underway as part of the Emergency Communication 
Transformation Program. The second assessment examined the operations, 
procedures, and call volumes of the 911 system. Through the operational assessment, 
improvements in emergency care emerged as a top priority.

New York City ambulances respond to over a million calls each year, 40 percent of which 
are for life-threatening emergencies. As that volume continues to increase, the challenge 
of maintaining optimal coverage in every part of the city, at all times, only becomes 
greater. To address this problem and reduce response times, the City will explore 
options to provide additional support where the need is greatest. This year, the City 
added 45 additional ambulance tours and deployed additional resources to station areas, 
focused in southern Bronx, western Queens, and Staten Island. The City is also building 
out a fully redundant, second 911 answering center in the Bronx, increasing staffing of 
dispatchers and supervisors, and improving governance and quality assurance protocols 
to ensure a more robust and efficient emergency response system. 

Service providers, such as in-home food and health service organizations, could play 
an essential role in emergency preparedness and planning. To ensure service 

225

Neighborhoodsnyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City providers are equipped with the necessary tools and training to serve vulnerable 
populations during emergencies, the City will include front-line staff in emergency 
planning, training on public communications, and table-top exercises. In addition, 
the City will modify standardized contracts to require service providers to 
participate in the City’s emergency protocols (such as Advance Warning System), 
develop a training program to incorporate community-based organizations in 
response and recovery operations, and assign all available City employees a response 
role for emergencies.

The City will continue to integrate its Hazard Mitigation Plan with climate resiliency 
plans so that we are planning for and acting on the full array of hazards and risks our 
city faces. Additionally, the City will launch its third NPCC in 2015, which will include 
a climate risk analysis to inform planning and decision making on resiliency efforts 
focused on equity and regionalism.

Finally, the City will work with the design and construction industries to develop a 
system of standardized on-call contracts, with agreed upon payment and risk 
management terms, in order to deploy construction and other services such as 
effective and efficient debris removal and building repairs during and after a major 
disruptive event. And we will work to improve long-term case management for 
those impacted by disasters to connect survivors with the services they need.

Initiative 3
Support small businesses and local commercial corridors 

Small businesses form a critical part of any community, providing jobs as well as 
goods and services. After Sandy, the disruption to businesses in affected 
communities meant lost earnings for business owners, displaced jobs for workers, 
and reduced access to vital goods and services. As a result, residents in many 
communities were left with limited options to meet their daily needs. 

In response, the City provided financial and technical assistance 
to more than 650 businesses in the immediate aftermath of 
Hurricane Sandy. In addition, the Hurricane Sandy Business 
Loan and Grant Program will have served more than 250 
businesses before the end of 2015. As of April 2015, the City has 
approved awards worth $35 million to more than 200 businesses.  

In Spring 2015, the City will announce the winners of  
RISE : NYC, a $30 million competition that leverages  
innovative resiliency technologies in energy infrastructure, 
telecommunications, and building systems for small businesses. 
Additionally, the City will launch a new Business PREP program 
to provide tailored resources and technical assistance in 

226

A local business on Richmond 
Terrace in Staten Island

Neighborhoodsnyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Workers constructing a home

preparing and planning for future disruptive events to businesses citywide and 
thereby enhancing their resiliency. 

The City will also invest $30 million toward commercial corridor enhancements in 
Coney Island and the Rockaways, including storm water management, streetscape 
and place-making projects to enhance the connectivity of these places, and 
improvement of local infrastructure that provides basic services to businesses.  
 
Initiative 4

Ensure that workforce development is a part of all 
resiliency investments 

As the City advances its more than $20 billion resiliency capital investment program, 
residents impacted by Sandy will have opportunities to access employment and the 
training needed to be eligible for the construction jobs these investments will create. 
To realize this opportunity, the City will build on the model designed for the Build it 
Back program that established the Sandy Recovery Workforce1 program, which 
encourages the hiring of Sandy-impacted residents and provides training vouchers 
for residents to access pre-apprenticeship programs. 

Specifically, the City will ensure all investments that strengthen the city’s resiliency 
will create job opportunities for residents and low-income applicants. This will 
require the City, in cooperation with the Law Department and Mayor’s Office of 
Contract Services (MOCS), to adopt standardized language for all procurement 
documents and contracts for resiliency-related work, and require contractors and 
consultants to report on efforts and outcomes related to local hiring and training. 
Working with the Department of Information Technology and Telecommunications 
(DoITT), the City will develop a centralized tool for tracking and reporting on this 
data with the goal of improving the hiring of Sandy-impacted residents and low-
income applicants.

Additionally, community outreach and workforce development services will be 
further integrated with development projects in partnership with industry and labor 
organizations. For example, a new and long-awaited agreement between the New 
York City Housing Authority (NYCHA) and unions from the building and 
construction trades covering an estimated $3.5 billion of investment will secure 
access to jobs and training opportunities for many Sandy-impacted residents, 
including NYCHA residents, through both pre-apprenticeship and apprenticeship 
programs. The City's Department of Small Business Services (SBS), will secure 
additional State funding for community-supported workforce development services 
in several Sandy-impacted neighborhoods.

227

Neighborhoodsnyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 5
Mitigate the risks of heat

The effects of urban heat are well known. Extreme summer heat kills, on average, 
over 100 New Yorkers annually from heat stroke and the heat-related exacerbation 
of chronic health problems. Hundreds more need hospital care for serious heat-
related illness. The risk of death from extreme heat is highest among those without 
air conditioning, in neighborhoods with higher poverty rates, and where there is less 
land covered by trees and other vegetation. By greening neighborhoods and 
increasing access to air conditioning, we aim to reduce heat-related illnesses and 
deaths, and reduce disparities in vulnerability to climate change. 

In partnership with The Nature Conservancy, the City is developing strategies to 
evaluate the best available science on the urban heat island effect in order to invest 
in better data collection and develop effective capital investment and operational 
strategies to adapt our city to the increasing impacts of urban heat. First, the City 
will identify urban heat mitigation and adaptation strategies to benefit the city’s 
most heat-vulnerable communities by coordinating through a new Urban Heat 
Island Working Group that has already begun to meet.

The Working Group will make recommendations for the creation of a citywide air 
temperature monitoring system to enable the collection of community-level 
temperature data to guide urban heat mitigation and emergency response activities. 

In order to measure heat mitigation activities accurately across the five boroughs, 
the City will seek updates to its 2010 LiDAR dataset, which will involve aerial data 
collection through remote sensing. This will help the City to quantify the 
investments that have already been made and will inform future strategies about 
how to plan the built environment. Additional insights from LiDAR data will include 
the extent of the tree canopy across the five boroughs, and better detail for the City’s 
public mapping data, among others. The City is already working to secure federally-
provided 2013 LiDAR data. 

Additionally, the City will call on the State to ensure cooling access during extreme 
heat for low-income, heat-vulnerable populations through an expanded allocation of 
Federal Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program funds to assist with air 
conditioning purchase and installation, and utility costs. These air conditioners will 
be as energy efficient as possible, and are a life-saving resource for seniors and those 
with pre-existing health conditions. 

Finally, the City will propose that the New York City Board of Health amend 
the health code to establish maximum allowable temperatures in residential 
facilities and supportive housing for vulnerable people to protect against heat-
related illness.

228

Neighborhoodsnyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Heat Vulnerability Index (HVI) for 
New York City Community Districts
The HVI is adapted from a study by researchers at the 
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DOHMH) 
and Columbia University who analyzed mortality data 
from 2000 through 2011. The analysis identified factors 
that were associated with an increased risk of deaths 
during a heat wave. The map shows New York City 
Community Districts ranked from least to most vulner-
able and divided into five equal groups. Each Commu-
nity District HVI is the average of all census tracts in 
the Community District.

Low Vulnerability 

Moderate Vulnerability 

High Vulnerability 

Source: NYC DOHMH

Heat-related illness and death rates, by neighborhood poverty in New York City

Neighborhood  
Poverty

Low (<10%)

Medium (10 to <20%)

High (20 to <30%)

Very High (30%+)

Average annual ED  
visit rate per million, 
excluding admissions 

and deaths  
(2005–2010)

Average annual  

hospital admission  

rate per million,  
excluding deaths 

(2000–2010)

Average annual death 

rate per million 

(2000–2011)

Percentage  

Aged 65+ Without  
Air Conditioning  

(2013)

36.7

52.4

55.2

76.5

12.7

18.5

19.0

21.1

1.2

1.4

1.5

1.9

8.1

9.3

18.9

18.8

Notes: Data on heat-related deaths, hospital visits, and emergency department visits are restricted to events in the months of May through September for the 
years indicated. Neighborhood poverty rates are based on zip code and are defined as the percentage of residents with incomes below 100% of the Federal 
Poverty Level per the American Community Survey 2007-2011. Population estimates for incidence are based on 2010 census data.
Source: NYC DOHMH

229

Neighborhoodsnyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Buildings

Goal: The city’s buildings will be upgraded against 
changing climate impacts

Overview
Newly constructed buildings in New York City are designed to meet current codes 
that promote safety and energy efficiency. But the vast majority of city buildings—
our homes, schools, workplaces, businesses, and places of worship—were 
constructed before most modern standards were in place. There is a significant need 
to adapt buildings across the five boroughs to withstand and recover from extreme 
weather events and other hazards, while continuing to serve residents and 
businesses during normal conditions. 

The Mayor's Office of Housing Recovery Operations is making significant 
investment in homes across the city through the Build it Back program, supporting 
the recovery of single-family homeowners and multi-family building residents. 
Eligible homeowners may repair, elevate, rebuild, or sell their homes. This program 
was dramatically improved in 2014 and is continuing to serve Sandy-impacted 
residents.

Other buildings across the city are also subject to ongoing climate risks, particularly 
the flooding associated with storm surge and sea level rise, as well as wind and heat. 
When the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) released its first Flood 
Insurance Rate Maps for New York City in 1983, it defined the 100-year floodplain—
the area that has a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year—as an 
expanse that today includes approximately 35,500 buildings. However, Sandy’s 
extensive flooding encompassed over 88,700 buildings, and according to current 

INDICATORS + TARGETS

 Increase the percentage of 
households in the 100-
year floodplain with flood 
insurance policies 
 Increase the square footage 
of buildings upgraded 
against flood risk
 Increase the number of 
homes elevated through the 
Build it Back program

Using white roofs to adapt
buildings at the Brooklyn 
Navy Yard

FEMA updates to these maps, the new 
100-year floodplain is expected to include 
approximately 71,500 buildings. These 
expanding floodplains will bring flood 
construction and insurance requirements 
into neighborhoods that were not built to 
such standards. 

Looking ahead, with new flood maps and 
rising flood insurance premiums, it will be 
critical to align new zoning and land use 
changes with existing building codes to 
mitigate the risk of flooding, upgrade 
against other threats, and ensure mitigation 
and insurance options remain available and 
affordable in the city’s coastal communities.

230

nyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City A Build it Back home elevation in 
Broad Channel, Queens

Initiative 1
Upgrade public and private city 
buildings 

Many of New York City’s nearly one million buildings 
are not as prepared as they need to be against evolving 
risks. To address this, we will adapt vulnerable 
building stock to withstand the risks of climate 
change and extreme weather events. 

The City will implement the Build it Back program to 
demonstrate how best to prepare homes and 
neighborhoods for the future. In addition to elevating 
houses, the program is exploring other protective 
strategies to improve single-family homes and 
upgrade multi-family buildings, including the 
relocation or hardening of building systems, and 
flood-proofing of lower levels. The City’s multi-family 
housing component of Build it Back provides 
comprehensive resiliency retrofit measures necessary 
to protect vulnerable residents from the loss of 
critical building services in the event of a storm, such 
as raising electrical equipment and other building 
systems, flood-proofing lower levels of buildings, and 
ensuring the redundancy of building systems. 

The City will also invest in increasing the resiliency 
of public housing. NYCHA has secured over $3 
billion from FEMA to execute a comprehensive 
resiliency program across 33 public housing 
developments, which will include the elevation and 
hardening of building systems, flood-proofing, and 
upgrading infrastructure. 

The City will also continue to repair and upgrade 
City-owned buildings to mitigate the impacts of 
future climate changes. In all cases, the City is 
committed to maximizing the allocation of federal 
funding for building resiliency and will identify all 
required local match funding to secure those funds. 

231

Buildingsnyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 2
Adopt policies to support building upgrades 

The City’s efforts to upgrade buildings for climate resiliency must be supported by 
policies that enable the right investments in building resiliency. Overall, new zoning 
requirements, updated building codes, and reforms to flood insurance programs are 
already having an effect on the built environment, with the City coordinating these 
efforts across government stakeholders and with the community. 

The City will continue to align zoning and building code updates with reforms to the 
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and expected changes to the Flood 
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs). A working group focused on resiliency is already 
active within City government, with representatives across capital and planning 
agencies, and will lead this program.

By 2018, the City will work to develop and adopt consistent resilient design guidelines 
for buildings in areas vulnerable to flooding, extreme wind, and heat. With our 
changing climate, these standards will need to be developed based on an evaluation of 
the inherent uncertainty of future climate projections, the lifespan of assets, and their 
criticality in order to develop cost-effective design guidelines. These guidelines will 
ensure what is built adheres to the highest performance standards. 

Retrofit strategy for an attached 
home from Retrofitting Buildings 
for Flood Risk

232

Buildingsnyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City As part of this effort, the City will explore funding for loans and grants to finance 
and encourage resiliency retrofits such as home elevations and other building 
upgrades for building owners who were unable to participate in current programs. 

Another important aspect in this effort is land use. The City continues to evaluate 
land use as a tool to promote resiliency across the city. The Department of City 
Planning’s ongoing Resilient Neighborhoods studies are engaging communities in 
ten areas across the five boroughs that face flooding and other resiliency challenges. 
In this process, the City will evaluate and establish a framework for adaptive land 
use planning based on a range of coastal hazards and with consideration of climate 
change projections. This will include updates to local land use regulations and 
citywide zoning to promote resiliency investments in buildings and infrastructure, 
including commercial and industrial buildings, and will explore incentives to 
balance the costs of improvements.

Finally, the City will increase the capacity of owners and operators of buildings located 
in the floodplain to align investments around both sustainability and resiliency 
investments when capital improvements are made. This will coincide with 
investments being made in the City’s municipal and private building stock to promote 
energy efficiency and reduced greenhouse gas emissions, as detailed in Vision 3. 

Initiative 3
Work to reform FEMA’s National Flood Insurance 
Program (NFIP)

As the city’s coastal communities continue to be threatened by escalating flood risk 
and rising FEMA NFIP premiums, the City will pursue a comprehensive set of 
activities to promote investments in physical risk reduction and better policies, 
including those that promote NFIP affordability. This includes conducting several 
studies to evaluate recent NFIP changes and their impacts on urban environments, 
reviewing federal studies while they are being drafted, and working with FEMA to 
institute reforms based on the results of these studies. 

The City wants to be sure the public understands its flood risk and flood insurance 
purchase requirements, and is already conducting frequent outreach meetings and 
developing further public education campaign materials for city residents living in 
and near the floodplain. This flood insurance consumer education campaign seeks to 
inform as many people as possible about their flood risk through advertisements on 
public transportation and radio, as well as at community events and through elected 
officials, with two key messages for consumers: understand your risk and flood 
insurance purchase requirements and purchase flood insurance. 

233

“I live in Red Hook, 
Brooklyn, where flood 
insurance affordability is 
a concern. FEMA should 
reduce insurance 
premiums if homeowners 
take action to mitigate 
flood risk, like elevating 
mechanical equipment. 
We're really excited about 
the Integrated Flood 
Protection System for 
Red Hook and all such 
resiliency projects across 
the city.”

—Andrea S.,  
Red Hook

Buildingsnyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Today's population  
in the current  
and projected 
floodplain

Today's buildings  
in the current  
and projected 
floodplain

Based on this program, the City will also work to build a regional and nationwide 
coalition in advance of the 2017 reauthorization of the NFIP to achieve reforms that 
will ensure residents are better educated about their risk, more incentivized to 
mitigate risk, and better able to afford flood insurance premiums.

At the same time, the City will continue to explore participation in FEMA’s 
Community Rating System (CRS), which could reduce premiums for the city’s flood 
insurance policyholders.

2013  

(Preliminary 

FIRMs)

2050s 

(Projected)

2080s 

(Projected)

2100 

(Projected)

Manhattan

89,100

214,500

275,600

317,700

Bronx

16,300

51,200

113,900

143,800

Brooklyn

164,800

331,100

466,200

515,400

Queens

99,100

167,200

201,500

219,100

Staten Island

30,700

44,900

56,300

63,100

Citywide Total

400,000

808,900

1,113,500

1,259,100

2013  

(Preliminary 

FIRMs)

3,100

4,500

2050s 

(Projected)

2080s 

(Projected)

2100 

(Projected)

5,900

7,600

8,800

8,200

13,700

16,500

Manhattan

Bronx

Brooklyn

26,900

51,600

70,700

80,100

Queens

25,200

35,600

41,100

44,800

Staten Island

11,800

16,700

19,800

21,500

Citywide Total

71,500

118,000

152,900

171,700

Floodplain Source: FEMA (Current Floodplain) New York City 
Panel on Climate Change (NPCC) 2015 (2050s Floodplain) 

234

Buildingsnyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City FEMA 2015 Preliminary FIRMS 100-Year Floodplain

2050s Projected 100-Year Floodplain

2080s Projected 100-Year Floodplain

2100 Projected 100-Year Floodplain

Expanding 
floodplains due to 
rising sea levels

There are currently an 
estimated 400,000 residents 
and 71,500 buildings in the 
city’s 100-year floodplain. 
By the 2050s, the 100-year 
floodplain will expand to 
include an area that today has 
808,900 residents and 118,000 
buildings.  This expansion 
of the floodplain, caused by 
sea level rise, is expected to 
continue through the end of 
the century.

Source: New York City Panel on Climate 
Change, 2015

FEMA’s National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) 
 
Recent changes to the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), including the Bigger-Waters Flood Insurance Re-
form Act of 2012 and the Homeowner Flood Insurance Affordability Act of 2014, will have drastic consequences for 
the city’s coastal communities, including rising insurance premiums, increasing risks for home foreclosures, and loss 
of value for affected homes. To address this challenge, the City will continue to invest in risk reduction and work 
with FEMA to improve four critical aspects of its National Flood Insurance Program: 

1. Improve FEMA’s Flood Mapping Process: The City’s new Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Maps, issued in 

December 2013, had not been updated since they were first created in 1983, and as a result, when Hurricane Sandy 
hit, the flood maps severely understated the City’s flood risk. To better communicate and prepare for flood risk, the 
City seeks to require FEMA to update the maps at least every ten years. Further, the City will call on FEMA to imple-
ment a series of technical and process improvements—including exploration of the next generation of coastal flood 
models—to better represent and communicate flood risk. 

2. Improve Risk-Based Pricing: Currently, FEMA does not have the data required to adequately price a majority of 

New York City policies, such as those deemed to be “negatively-elevated structures.” In addition, FEMA does not, 
for the most part, offer premium reductions for mitigation approaches other than building elevation. The City is 
advocating for a broader list of partial mitigation measures that result in reduced risk and premiums. 

3. Improve Management of Write Your Own (WYO) Companies: FEMA sells its NFIP products through WYO 
insurance companies. Recent allegations concerning Sandy claims payments have demonstrated the need for better 
management and controls within insurance companies and by FEMA. The City will advocate for better oversight 
of these companies and better training of WYO companies to improve communication to existing and prospective 
clients. 

4. Ensure NFIP Affordability: The City is undertaking two affordability studies to help ensure the NIFP takes into 
account the specific characteristics of a dense, urban environment in the floodplain for both multi-family and one-
to-four family housing.

235

Buildingsnyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City INDICATORS + TARGETS

 Reduce customer-hours of 
weather-related utility and 
transit service outages
 Increase the percentage of 
patient beds at hospitals 
and long-term care facilities 
in the 100-year floodplain 
benefiting from retrofits for 
resiliency

Infrastructure

Goal: Infrastructure systems across the region 
will adapt to maintain continued services

Overview
The risks from climate change and other 21st century threats will further challenge 
the resiliency of the city’s aging infrastructure for years to come. The City aims to 
adapt infrastructure systems in the city and across the region to withstand the 
impacts of climate change, to ensure the continuity of critical services in an 
emergency, and to recover more quickly from service outages. 

The City is already implementing a robust portfolio of infrastructure-based recovery 
and resiliency initiatives as part of a more than $20 billion climate resiliency 
program—which will reach nearly $30 billion with additional spending by other 
regional partners. 

The City also coordinates closely with its partners in the energy, telecommunica-
tions, and transportation sectors across the region to facilitate planning for and 
investment in the resiliency of their assets. These partners include the Metropolitan 
Transportation Authority (MTA), the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey 
(PANYNJ), Con Edison, the Long Island Power Authority (LIPA), National Grid, 
AT&T, Sprint, T-Mobile, Cablevision, Verizon, and Time Warner Cable, among 
others. 

These publicly and privately owned systems are vulnerable to natural disasters and 
the impacts of climate change. Without proper investment, our transportation 
network, water, sewer, and waste infrastructure, energy system, telecommunications 
assets, and social infrastructure are all at risk. 

Transportation: The city’s transportation network is vital to helping New Yorkers 
recover after a disruptive event. There is a need for focused attention to prepare these 
facilities and assets for future shocks by making the right investments for adaptation. 
Our subway system is particularly vulnerable to flooding and power disruption. New 
York City’s freight infrastructure is not only critical for day-to-day operations, but also 
serves as a necessary network in emergency response during natural and man-made 
disasters. The freight network connects New Yorkers to commodities such as food and 
fuel from areas across the region by air, rail, ship, and road. 

Water, Sewer, and Waste: The city’s sewer system can be overwhelmed by heavy 
downpours that exceed the system’s design capacity, creating flooding and sewer 
backups, as well as by storm surges, which pose a risk to the city’s wastewater 
treatment plants and pumping stations. During heavy downpours, partially treated 
or untreated sewage can spill into waterways around New York City as a relief 

236

nyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City mechanism to avoid damage to treatment facilities. These events are anticipated to 
increase as New York City experiences more intense precipitation with more 
frequent flooding. The capacity of the City to manage its solid waste during and after 
a shock event is critical to maintaining healthy and safe conditions for communities. 
However, potential damage of sanitation facilities and assets, the ability to fully staff 
shifts, and the conditions of roadways, street lights, and other infrastructure in place 
determine the resiliency of the City’s solid waste management system. 

Energy: The city’s underground and overhead energy distribution systems are 
vulnerable to floodwaters and high winds, as are electricity- and steam-generating 
facilities and liquid fuel refinery and distribution terminals. Today, 88 percent of the 
City’s steam-generating capacity lies within the 100-year floodplain. In the electric 
power system, 53 percent of in-city electricity-generation capacity, 37 percent of 
transmission substation capacity, and 12 percent of large-distribution substation 
capacity lie within the floodplain. Heat waves also pose significant challenges to 
operability of the electrical grid. Of the 39 fuel terminals in the New York 
metropolitan area, nearly all lie within FEMA’s 100-year floodplain. Extreme 
weather events would cause direct damage to key liquid fuel assets in the region and 
disrupt the power infrastructure critical to the functioning of terminals, refineries, 
and pipelines.

Telecommunications: The ability to communicate reliably is critical, especially in 
an emergency. More than ever, the resiliency of telecommunications services across 
the city, including wired and wireless telephone, video, and internet, will affect the 
city’s capacity to both respond to a major disruptive event and implement a 
coordinated recovery. These systems rely on a vast infrastructure of over 50 
thousand miles of cabling, thousands of cell sites, and nearly 100 critical facilities. By 
the 2020s, 18 percent of telecommunications infrastructure will lie within the 
100-year floodplain. Recent upgrades to the fiber optic network have helped, but 
more improvements are needed.

Social Infrastructure: Infrastructure that strengthens communities, such as 
hospitals, community centers, libraries, and schools, can enhance social resiliency and 
assist in immediate response after a disruptive event. Parks, in particular, can play a 
role in protecting adjacent neighborhoods from severe weather, and serve as gathering 
places after an event. But these facilities are as vulnerable to damage or to the 
interruption of essential services as any other critical facilities. In an emergency, the 
continuity of operations for buildings, critical vehicles, and telecommunications 
networks for first responders is a matter of life and death. And hospitals and long-term 
care facilities, including nursing homes and adult care facilities, are equally crucial to 
the immediate response and long-term recovery of neighborhoods after a crisis. 

Each of these systems requires a specific set of activities to ensure the resiliency of 
the city.

237

Infrastructurenyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City A Resilient City
Current Investments in Infrastructure  
and Buildings

Transportation: $565 million

Regional Water and Wastewater: $5.5 billion 

Hospitals: $2.9 billion

Libraries: $10 million

Schools: $755 million 

NYCHA: $3.2 billion 

Other Housing Resiliency: $60 million 

MTA Fix and Fortify: $10.5 billion 

PANYNJ Sandy Program: $1.1 billion 

Con Edison: $1.0 billion 

Other: $50 million 

2013 100-Year Floodplain

2050s 100-Year Floodplain 

 

Floodplain Source: FEMA (Current Floodplain) New York City Panel on 
Climate Change (NPCC) 2015 (2050s Floodplain) 
Note: NPCC Floodplain is a high-end projection (90th percentile).  
All costs are rounded estimates. Not all projects shown. 

NYU Langone
Medical Center
$1,100 million
Bellevue Hospital
Campos Plaza II
$25 million
Campos Plaza I
$25 million
Riis Houses I and II
$127 and $58 million
Wald Houses
$162 million
Lavanburg Homes
$23 million
Baruch Houses
$192 million

Smith Houses
$115 million

Two Bridges
$17 million

Red Hook East
$209 million

Battery Park Underpass
$50 million

LaGuardia Houses
$84 million

Red Hook West
$241 million
Gowanus Houses
$115 million

Staten Island
University Hospital
$28 million

238

Infrastructurenyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Rangel Houses
$58 million
East River
$87 million
Metro North 
Consolidation
$40 million
Metropolitan
Hospital

Isaacs Houses
$33 million
Astoria Houses
$158 million

Coler Hospital

Hunts Point Modernization
$150 million

LaGuardia Protection
$37 million

Broad Channel Street Reconstruction
$19 million

Hammel Houses
$179 million
Carleton Manor Houses
$30 million
Ocean Bay Apartments Oceanside
$67 million
Ocean Bay Apartments Bayside
$285 million
Beach 41st Street Houses
$68 million

Redfern Houses
$142 million

Rockaway Commercial Corridors
$15 million

Rockaway Boardwalk
$480 million

239

Gravesend Houses
$175 million
Coney Island Commercial Corridors
$15 million
Coney Island Houses 
Sites 4 & 5
$40 million
Coney Island Houses 
Site 1B
$25 million

Coney Island Hospital

Coney Island Green Streets
$1 million
Carey Gardens Houses
$87 million
Haber Houses
$48 million
Surfside Gardens
$100 million

Coney Island Houses
$112 million
O’Dwyer Gardens/Site 8
$105 million
Coney Island Houses Site 8
$28 million

Infrastructurenyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 1
Adapt the region’s infrastructure systems

Infrastructure systems are vital to making our city run. Across the region, New 
Yorkers rely on infrastructure systems every day to light and heat their homes, 
obtain drinking water, get to work, and access information. However, these 
infrastructure assets require regular repairs and upgrades to remain operable and 
adapt for resiliency. The City will, therefore, continue to pursue programs to 
coordinate investments across agencies and other infrastructure providers. 

The City commits to repairing critical infrastructure systems damaged or destroyed 
by Hurricane Sandy, while mitigating future climate risks through billions of dollars 
in funds from FEMA's public assistance grant program. The City is providing a 
required local match of funds in order to secure these resources. 

Working with other regional partners, the City will invest in the resiliency of its 
transportation infrastructure, including ferries, tunnels, movable bridges, traffic 
signals, and streets, through the elevation or dry-proofing of facilities and systems, 
the hardening of conduits, enhanced continuity of operations planning, and 
mitigation strategies, such as hardening of street ends and green infrastructure for 
storm water management.

The City will work to ensure the resiliency of our freight network in the face of 
climate change by hardening our ports, rail, staging areas, and warehouses. The City 
is undertaking planning exercises to identify vulnerabilities to the freight network, 
improve redundancy, and provide resiliency strategies for at-risk infrastructure 
through partnerships with City agencies and the private sector. 

Further, the City is planning for green infrastructure installations across the five 
boroughs, including bioswales, rain gardens, permeable pavement, and green roofs 
to reduce the amount of stormwater entering the sewer system, thus helping to keep 
the sewers from exceeding their capacity. The City is also investing in the resiliency 
of its wastewater treatment plants and pumping stations by implementing measures 
such as elevating and flood-proofing equipment, constructing barriers, and installing 
backup power supplies to ensure continued service in the event of a major storm. 

Upstate reservoir dams are critical to our City’s drinking water sources. Given the 
increased variability in the frequency and magnitude of storms associated with 
climate change, DEP will go beyond the level of protection currently required by 
New York State. This guidance requires existing dams to be capable of safely passing 
half of the probable maximum flood, a standard we already meet. Beyond these 
requirements, we will commit to ensuring our dams safely pass the full probable 
maximum flood when capital improvements are made. Finally, while the science 
suggests New York City’s upstate water supply watersheds will experience increased 
precipitation due to climate change, we are also preparing for the risk of the 
opposite extreme: drought. The City commits to protecting our fresh water 

240

Infrastructurenyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City resources, managing demand, increasing infrastructure investments for greater 
flexibility, and maintaining a steady supply of water during all weather conditions.

The City’s ability to function during a disaster depends on a resilient information 
technology infrastructure that keeps critical agency applications running, data 
accessible and secure, and telecommunications networks operating. The City will do 
so by populating its backup data center with replication and backup of critical 
applications, and incorporate this data center into its continuity of operations plans 
for City agencies. It will also continue hardening network and infrastructure assets 
to withstand both storm-related power outages and power grid outages, and 
strengthen the City’s support of mission-critical operations for first responders and 
essential City services.

In addition, the City will develop strategies to promote and enforce resiliency for 
telecommunications providers through the franchise renewal process and other 
agreements with the City. DoITT’s newly created Telecommunications Planning and 
Resiliency Office is facilitating an ongoing dialogue with telecommunications 
providers to discuss resiliency initiatives and address barriers to implementation. 

MTA workers clear a clogged drain near the Cortlandt Street subway station to prevent flooding during a heavy rain event

241

Infrastructurenyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City The City will also work with wireless carriers to ensure cell sites and networks are 
hardened and resilient. In some cases, technology upgrades made at cell sites have 
improved battery backup time (e.g., newer equipment does not draw as much 
power). We also helped facilitate discussions between one wireless carrier and the 
Fire Department of New York City that ultimately led to approval of an alternate fuel 
source option for backup power. The carrier plans to deploy at least two of these 
units in New York City. And we have also advocated for strong backup power 
requirements in proceedings before the Federal Communications Commission. 
Further, LinkNYC will increase access to affordable broadband through a network of 
public Wi-Fi, and is a model for incorporating resiliency requirements into franchise 
agreements, ranging from enhancing cyber-security to submitting an annual 
resiliency plan.

The City will proceed with the retrofit of critical buildings, such as healthcare, 
hospitals, and long-term care facilities, and other critical municipal assets for 
long-term resiliency and to help our critical buildings withstand the risks posed by 
climate change. The City has secured nearly $1.7 billion from FEMA to execute a 
comprehensive resiliency program across four HHC facilities: Bellevue Hospital, 
Coney Island Hospital, Metropolitan Hospital, and Coler Rehabilitation and Nursing 
Care Center. Resiliency upgrades to these facilities will include the installation of 
backup power systems, the elevation and hardening of building systems, and flood-
proofing of lower levels. The City is also working to secure funds from FEMA’s 
Hazard Mitigation Grant Program for the resiliency of long-term care facilities 
located in the 100-year floodplain.

Initiative 2
Adopt policies to support infrastructure adaptation

The City will use the best available climate science, as well as robust research, 
legislative action, advocacy, and regional coordination to adapt the city’s 
infrastructure to be resilient against disruption. It is critical to standardize the 
process by developing and implementing a set of design guidelines for resiliency to 
ensure what we build adheres to the highest performance standards. By 2018, we 
aim to have all New York City agencies adopt standardized resiliency design 
guidelines for streets, transportation, public spaces, utilities, and other 
infrastructure. 

The City will call on regional infrastructure providers and operators, such as the 
MTA, PANYNJ, ConEdison, National Grid, LIPA, and Verizon to make critical 
resiliency investments in their systems, coordinated through the Climate Change 
Adaptation Task Force. 

The City will explore, with our State and academic partners, the preparation of a 
Regional Resiliency Assessment Program with the U.S. Department of Homeland 

242

Infrastructurenyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Security on the resiliency of the City’s supply chain for critical commodities such as 
food, fuels, materials, and consumer goods. NYC EM and Department of Citywide 
Administrative Services are in development of operational response strategies to 
address possible fuel disruptions to New York City. In order to prevent and prepare 
for such disruptions, these agencies and the Mayor’s Office are working in 
partnership with the Columbia University SIPA Center on Global Energy Policy, as 
well as state, federal, and private sector partners to develop a liquid fuels resiliency 
strategy. This may include standardized regulatory waivers, communications 
protocols, fuel reserves, and hardening of assets for the refinement, storage, and 
delivery of fuels.

The City will also conduct an analysis and develop recommendations to enhance the 
resiliency of the city’s food supply chain, which is expected to support further 
investments at the Hunts Point Food Distribution Center beyond the funds that have 
already been identified through HUD’s Rebuild by Design competition. 

Activity at the New Fulton Fish Market at Hunts Point

243

Infrastructurenyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City INDICATORS + TARGETS

 Increase the linear feet of 
coastal defenses completed
 Increase the acres of coastal 
ecosystems restored
 Increase the number of 
residents benefiting from 
coastal defenses and 
restored ecosystems

Coastal Defense

Goal: New York City’s coastal defenses will be 
strengthened against flooding and sea level rise

Overview
Hurricane Sandy vividly demonstrated the city’s vulnerability to coastal storms. 
With 520 miles of coastline, New York City has been exposed to these risks since its 
founding. Over the past 400 years, the city’s shoreline has been developed and 
modified in ways that have contributed to increased risks from coastal storms. Now, 
a changing climate is adding to the risks.

Our current understanding of flood risk comes from FEMA and its Flood Insurance 
Rate Maps (FIRMs). These maps were first adopted in 1983 and showed that 33 
square miles of the city were in the 100-year floodplain, which includes 218,000 
people. Updated maps will show approximately 400,000 people currently in the 
100-year floodplain.

These maps do not include projections on rising sea levels. In addition to the 
approximately 1.1 feet of sea level rise the city has experienced since 1900, current 
mid-range projections show sea levels will rise another one to two feet by 2050 and 
two to four feet by 2100. The NPCC shows that due to sea level rise, these 
floodplains are expected to continue growing and increase the frequency and 
intensity of citywide flooding. In fact, the floodplain projections provided by the 
NPCC show 71 square miles will be in the 100-year floodplain in 2050, which 
includes approximately 808,900 people. This is a 42 percent increase.

Alarming as they are, these projections largely assume that no action will be taken to 
mitigate this risk. However, the City is continuing to act to reduce the impacts of 
climate change. We will expand our efforts to adapt coastal communities to the 
evolving risks of climate change, including flooding and sea level rise. In June 2013, 
the City released its first-ever comprehensive coastal protection plan, which will 
significantly reduce the city’s vulnerabilities. 

Since 2013, the city has initiated many projects to strengthen our defenses against 
the risks associated with climate change. These projects include beach nourishment 
in Coney Island, the Rockaways, and Staten Island; miles of new dunes across the 
city’s beaches; repairs to bulkheads in low-lying neighborhoods; new investments in 
Red Hook, the east side of Manhattan, Lower Manhattan, Breezy Point, Howard 
Beach, and Tottenville; and feasibility studies for flood protection systems for 
Newtown Creek, Gowanus Canal, East Harlem, the North Shore of Staten Island, 
and Coney Island Creek.

244

nyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City We are also partnering with U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) as it 
implements new coastal resiliency projects, including construction of T-groins at 
Sea Gate in Coney Island, advancing implementation of the East Shore levee and 
South Shore investments in Staten Island, and development of the Rockaway 
Reformulation investments on the Rockaway peninsula beaches and in Jamaica Bay. 

All of this work will continue to require funds and new sources of financing. While the 
City has successfully launched its first phase of a coastal protection program with 
nearly half of the funding secured, more funds are needed now and in the future to 
implement this program fully and effectively reduce risk in our coastal communities.

New York City's Comprehensive Coastal Protection Plan

Source: A Stronger, More Resilient New York, 2013

245

Coastal Defensenyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 1
Strengthen the city’s coastal defenses

Prior to 2013, the City had never adopted a comprehensive coastal protection plan to 
reduce the risk of coastal flooding and sea level rise. With the release of A Stronger, 
More Resilient New York, the City now has a comprehensive coastal protection plan 
in place and has already taken steps to implement its first phase, which includes a 
$3.7 billion program of infrastructure investments, natural area restorations, and 
design and governance upgrades. The City will, as funds continue to be identified, 
make progress on the entire plan.

Over the next ten years, the City will strengthen its coastal defenses by completing 
many vital projects in all five boroughs, including:

•  An integrated flood protection system for the east side of Manhattan and in Lower 

Manhattan south of Montgomery Street to the northern end of Battery Park City 

•  Armored levee and stormwater management on the East Shore of Staten Island, 

in partnership with USACE 

•  Investments on the Rockaway peninsula beaches and in Jamaica Bay, as part of 
the USACE Rockaway Reformulation, plus further investments in Breezy Point 

•  An integrated flood protection system in Red Hook, in partnership with the State 

•  Coastal and energy resiliency improvements in Hunts Point to protect the city’s 

food distribution center from flooding and power loss

•  Investments to improve low-lying shorelines across the city, including in Coney 

Island and the South Shore of Staten Island 

•  Nature-based measures in Jamaica Bay, such as those at Sunset Cove in Broad 

Channel and Spring Creek in Howard Beach

To deepen public participation in the implementation of this coastal protection plan, 
the City will also reestablish and expand the Waterfront Management Advisory 
Board (WMAB) to advise the City on the waterfront, including coastal resiliency, 
natural resources, and related waterfront topics. 

Through a partnership with the NPCC and the Science and Resilience Institute at 
Jamaica Bay, the City will continue to expand its understanding of the science of 
resiliency and explore nature-based strategies to enhance resiliency in the city. The 
City will also continue to explore the implementation of other innovative resiliency 
programs, including oyster production and education programs.

246

Coastal Defensenyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City East Side Coastal Resiliency
 
In June 2014, the City was awarded $355 million for coastal resiliency investments through 
HUD’s Rebuild by Design competition, aimed at stimulating the development and funding of 
innovative resiliency projects in the Sandy-impacted region. Of the total amount, $335 million 
was earmarked for development of the first phase of an east side integrated flood protection 
system in Lower Manhattan. This system is expected to stretch from East 23rd Street to 
Montgomery Street, with enhanced resiliency against flooding while expanding public access 
to East River Park and its adjacent esplanades. When completed, it will benefit thousands of 
public housing and other residents of a particularly vulnerable part of Manhattan, and will 
demonstrate a new model for integrating coastal protection into neighborhoods, consistent 
with the City’s resiliency vision.

247

Coastal Defensenyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City A Resilient City
Coastal Protection Project Status

Completed

Study Funded

Project Funded 

DCP Resilient Neighborhoods Study Areas

2013 100-Year Floodplain

2050s 100-Year Floodplain

 

Floodplain Source: FEMA (Current Floodplain) NPCC 2015  
(2050s Floodplain) 
Note: NPCC Floodplain is a high-end projection (90th percentile).  
All costs are rounded estimates. Not all projects shown. 

East Side Coastal Resiliency
$335 million
Resilient Neighborhoods Study Area
West Chelsea
Resilient Neighborhoods Study Area
Lower East Side
Southern Manhattan Multipurpose 
Levee Study
$1 million
Battery Park Resiliency Improvements
$8 million

Lower Manhattan
Comprehensive Coastal Protection
$7 million
USACE NY Harbor and Tributaries
Feasibility Study
Red Hook
Integrated Flood Protection System
$100 million

North Shore Staten
Island Resiliency
$1 million
Saw Mill Creek
Wetlands Mitigation Bank
$15 million

Resilient Neighborhoods
Study Areas
South Beach
Midland Beach
New Dorp Beach
Oakwood Beach

Staten Island
Emergency Berm
Restoration
$9 million

Belt Parkway
Bulkhead Repair
$10 million

East Shore 
of Staten Island
$500 million

Oakwood Beach
Tide Gate Repair
Great Kills Breakwater

Wolfe’s Pond Park Berm Repair
$5 million

South Shore Shoreline Elevation
$32 million
Tottenville Living Breakwaters
$60 million
Tottenville Dunes and
Coastal Dune Plantings
$7 million

248

Coastal Defensenyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Tibbetts Brook Daylighting
$2 million

Hunts Point Lifelines
$45 million

Starlight Park Edge Restoration
$16 million

East Harlem Resiliency
$1 million

Plumb Beach Nourishment
and Breakwater
$5 million

Resilient Neighborhoods
Study Area
Gerritsen Beach

Resilient Neighborhoods
Study Area
Sheepshead Bay

NPS
Investments

Breezy Point Double Dunes
$58 million
Rockaway Inlet Barrier Study

Coney Island Emergency Beach Nourishment

Coney Island Creek Shoreline Elevation
$32 million
Coney Island Creek Tidal Barrier Study
$2 million
Sea Gate T-Groins
$30 million
Sea Gate Bulkhead
$3 million

Hart Island Shoreline Restoration
$13 million

Resilient Neighborhoods Study Area
Edgewater Park

Resilient Neighborhoods Study Area
Harding Park

Rikers Island Shoreline Restoration
$49 million

Flushing Meadow Tide Gate
$5 million

Newtown Creek and Gowanus Canal 
Local Storm Surge Barrier
$2 million
Resilient Neighborhoods Study Area
Canarsie

Upper Spring Creek Wetland Restoration
$12 million
Howard Beach/Lower Spring Creek Flood Protection
$50 million

Resilient Neighborhoods Study Area
Hamilton Beach and Old Howard Beach

Rockaway Reformulation (Jamaica Bay)
Head of Bay Oysters
$1 million
Resilient Neighborhoods Study Area
Broad Channel
Brant Point Wave Attenuation
$1 million
Rockaway Peninsula
Emergency Beach Nourishment

Rockaway Reformulation (Atlantic beaches)
Sunset Cove Marsh Restoration
$9 million
Resilient Neighborhoods Study Area
Rockaway Beach and Rockaway Park
Beach Channel Drive Bulkhead Repair
$26 million

249

Coastal Defensenyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 2
Attract new funds for vital coastal protection projects

The City’s $3.7 billion coastal protection plan is nearly 50 percent funded and 
moving forward. But significant portions of the plan still require additional funds 
for implementation. 

To address this need, the City will continue to identify and secure new sources of 
funds to reduce coastal flooding risk. In partnership with USACE, a new feasibility 
study for New York Harbor and its tributaries will launch in 2015. It is intended to 
result in new projects that can be authorized and funded in New York City, in 
accordance with the City’s coastal protection plan. 

To advance elements of its full-build coastal protection plan, the City is conducting 
its own feasibility studies of several investment opportunities, including at Coney 
Island Creek, Newtown Creek, Gowanus Canal, and Lower Manhattan. These 
studies are being conducted to inform future USACE studies, and are intended to 
strengthen the City’s ability to secure additional funds. 

The City will also seek out new sources of funding. HUD is currently running a 
National Disaster Resilience Competition which will fund innovative resiliency 
measures that strengthen communities. The City has already submitted its phase 
one application to this competition. Throughout the rest of 2015, the City will 
work with community partners and other stakeholder agencies to secure funds 
through this competition.

In addition, the City will continue to 
evaluate long-term coastal protection 
measures, such as a multipurpose 
levee in Lower Manhattan, 
particularly where investments could 
strengthen communities and 
potentially generate funding to offset 
construction costs. Finally, the City 
will continue to explore other 
innovative financing opportunities.

A proposed multipurpose 
levee in Lower Manhattan

250

Coastal Defensenyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 3
Adopt policies to support coastal protection

In order to strengthen the city’s coastal defenses effectively, policies must be aligned 
and adopted to support the right investments in coastal protection and ensure those 
investments are operated and maintained effectively. 

As new assets are built, it will be necessary for the City to have a more effective 
management plan for waterfront assets. To address this need, the City will continue 
to upgrade its waterfront management tools and fund citywide waterfront 
inspections to assess and better manage its assets. 

The City will also explore new governance models to support the completion and 
long-term operation of integrated coastal resiliency measures, based on national and 
international best practices. 

Construction of t-groins at Sea 
Gate in Brooklyn

251

Coastal Defensenyc.gov/onenycVision 4One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Diverse and 
Inclusive 
Government

252

Diverse and Inclusive Governmentnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City One of New York City’s greatest strengths is its diversity. We have always been a 
city of many cultures, attracting people from across the nation and around the world 
who seek opportunity in a vibrant, engaging, and supportive urban environment. 

City government’s ability to govern effectively and serve all our residents depends 
on the diversity of our workforce and senior leadership, and maintaining an 
atmosphere in City workplaces that accepts and embraces diversity. 

Diversity helps increase innovation. Research has shown that effective diversity 
management coupled with an inclusive work environment improves organizational 
performance and innovation. A diverse workforce also brings different perspectives 
and solutions to challenges, often resulting in new and creative advances. 

City agencies invest large amounts of their budgets in compensation and benefits. 
The return on this investment significantly increases with a leadership pipeline of 
diverse individuals that is representative of all New Yorkers. The diversity dividend 
is maximized when employees perform at their peak. Peak performance can only 
happen in inclusive, harassment-free environments where workplace policies that 
enhance retention, produce greater workplace engagement, and further productivity 
across the organization are in place. 

Diversity and inclusion increase an agency’s capacity to serve and protect people with 
different experiences or backgrounds; they also enhance an agency’s ability to be 
receptive to different traditions and ideas. A workforce that reflects the City of 
New York builds trust in government and inspires our residents’ civic 
engagement. Building on this legacy of improving diversity and inclusion, New York 
City is now positioned to strengthen its commitment and accelerate our efforts to 
attract, retain, and develop a diverse workforce. The City is also determined to serve 
all New Yorkers equally, including representation and participation of minority- and 
women-owned businesses (M/WBE) in OneNYC and all City initiatives. 

253

Diverse and Inclusive Governmentnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Government Workforce

Goal: Build a government workforce reflective of 
the diversity and inclusion of all New York City 
communities 

Overview
A majority of the City’s current civil workforce is comprised of women and people of 
color. Given the diversity of our population, we must also diversify our senior 
leadership. Equitable representation across all levels of City government strengthens 
the city by increasing efficiency, excellence, and strong delivery of City services; 
increasing the economic security of previously excluded professionals and their 
families; growing a diverse middle class; enhancing trust in government with a 
workforce that reflects the community it serves; and creating a pipeline of young 
leaders to join New York City government. 

Initiative 1
Improve the way New York City recruits a diverse 
workforce

In order to show that government work is an attractive career path for graduating high 
school and college students from all backgrounds, we have strong programs and 
partnerships with organizations, high schools, colleges, and graduate programs to 
learn from and grow targeted talent recruitment pipelines. 

We will launch new programs to recruit administrative talent as we better leverage 
and publicize our existing programs. In addition to the Public Service Corps, we 
currently run the Management Academy, a program designed specifically for the city’s 
new and emerging leaders; the Leadership Institute, which has helped prepare 
outstanding mid-level agency executives to lead organizational change initiatives; and 
the Urban Fellows program, which was designed to introduce America’s finest college 
students and graduates to local government and public service. 

We will study the potential of three new programs: the Mayoral Leadership Institute 
for mid-level administration leaders to partner with a local university; the Mayoral 
Public Sector Fellowship to provide graduate school opportunities for high performing 
mid- and senior-level officials; and the Smart Government Initiative partnership with 
Cornell Tech for entry- and junior-level public sector professionals.

254

Diverse and Inclusive Governmentnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City The New York City government has  
built a diverse and inclusive workforce  
of 327,793 employees

Successful Existing 
Programs

Gender Balance

NYC Government

NYC Population

43% 
male

48% 
male

57% 
female

52% 
female

2013 Workforce Profile Report, NYCEDC’s Center for Economic Transformation

Median Age

NYC Government

45.2

years

NYC Population

35.6

years

2013 Workforce Profile Report, ACS 2013

Racial Diversity

NYC Government

NYC Population

39% 
White

32% 
Black

33% 
White

25% 
Black

1% 
Other
8% 
Asian

20% 
Hispanic

1% 
Other

13% 
Asian

2013 Workforce Profile Report, ACS

28% 
Hispanic

The City’s Public Service Corps program is the 
nation’s first and largest off-campus internship 
program for college students. It provides under-
graduate and graduate students with opportunities 
to serve their communities, build professional 
skills, and learn about careers in the public sector. 
The Department of Citywide Administrative Ser-
vices (DCAS) and Department of Education (DOE) 
currently partner to provide internships, training, 
and other support to the City’s automotive high 
schools, led by the Brooklyn Automotive High 
School. This successful partnership has improved 
educational opportunities and led to direct em-
ployment for automotive high school participants. 
DCAS offers training courses designed to strength-
en test-taking skills and workforce readiness, and 
assists students in matching their education and 
experience with City jobs and highlighting poten-
tial exams from the exam schedule. 

255

Diverse and Inclusive Governmentnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 2
Improve the way New York City retains  
a diverse workforce

Recruiting a diverse workforce is only part of the story. Unless the City provides 
workplaces that embrace diversity and provide equitable opportunities for all City 
workers to grow and succeed, we will struggle to both recruit and maintain that diversity.

This means the City must takes steps to ensure it is diverse at every level and 
that people from all backgrounds have opportunities across disciplinary areas. 
This is the 21st century. It’s no longer acceptable for our teaching corps to be all 
female or our firefighters all male. 

To improve the way New York City retains a diverse workforce, City agencies have 
formed diversity work groups and internal councils to develop and share best 
practices and address the underrepresentation of various demographic groups in 
certain areas. For example, the Department of Design and Construction has 
established a cross-divisional task force to focus on hiring and succession planning 
within their agency. Meanwhile, the Law Department has established a mentoring 
initiative called the Coaching Collaborative, which meets on a regular basis to 
discuss ways to enhance the work environment. And the Fire Department is 
planning a specific initiative to recruit talented women firefighters as part of its 
broader diversity agenda. 

The opportunity to increase diversity is particularly ripe at this moment, with large 
segments of the City workforce soon eligible to retire. DCAS will lead a project to 
integrate workforce analytics into succession planning to promote career 
opportunities that exist, and utilize long-range planning to map retirement trends 
and establish New York City government workforce needs and hiring imperatives 
for the future. In the next two years, DCAS plans to conduct an annual Employee 
Engagement survey; deploy onboarding and exit interview guidance; issue a full 
Workforce Profile Report; identify workforce trends; issue an updated Risk 
Assessment Tool to enable each agency to analyze its own workforce, turnover rates, 
and attrition risks; develop a retirement predictor analysis and incorporate findings 
into exam planning and attrition risk assessments; and analyze training records to 
identify training efficacy and impact on career mobility.

256

Diverse and Inclusive Governmentnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 3
Improve the way New York City develops a diverse 
workforce

New York City is undertaking a disparity study in accordance with Local Law 1. 
The results of this study will help inform M/WBE goals, which will be included in 
the future OneNYC progress update. For the first time since 2005, DCAS, in 
cooperation with the Mayor’s Office, issued a revised citywide Equal Employment 
Opportunity (EEO) policy that included diversity and inclusion leadership best 
practices for commissioners. Agencies are currently participating in the Managing 
Diversity and Inclusion Leadership Initiative (MDLI), which focuses on 15 
best practices including commitment statements from commissioners, quarterly 
reviews of workforce data on the diversity of senior leadership candidate slates, 
mentoring, succession planning, identification of high potential talent, structured 
interviewing, and measuring the establishment of employee resource groups. 
Seventy percent of agencies have already incorporated a focus on ten of the best 
practices into their annual diversity and EEO plans. NYPD is the top performer 
engaged in or exploring all 15 best practices. 

DCAS developed and promotes Everybody Matters, the City’s flagship diversity and 
inclusion training program available to all agencies. Between January and April 2015, 
DCAS has trained more than 6,000 employees. 

To further expand our diversity, we will focus on recruiting and including 
populations that historically have not been measured in our multicultural and 
multi-generational workforce. These populations include disabled, veterans, and 
LGBT residents. 

We will also expand vocational skills and training programs in public service, which 
are expected to help the City reach populations that have previously been under-
represented in government jobs that require vocational skills. These programs will 
be developed with our union partners to address the skills gap. We will also establish 
clear career pathways and mentoring programs, enhance our talent development 
framework, and include budget allocations for agencies to enhance diverse 
recruiting practices. 

257

Diverse and Inclusive Governmentnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Minority and Women-owned Business 
Enterprises

Goal: Increase total City awards to Minority and 
Women-owned Business Enterprises (M/WBEs) 
to $16 billion over the next ten years

Overview
Minority and Women-owned Business Enterprises (M/WBEs) are some of the 
strongest drivers of local economic growth because they tend to hire from within 
New York City’s diverse communities and keep money and investments flowing back 
into our communities. By awarding contracts to M/WBEs, the City will not only 
help close the inequality gap when it comes to wealth creation, but also support 
sustainable and diverse communities and local economic growth.

New York City is currently a leader in M/WBE inclusion, but there is still significant 
room for improvement. Contracts have not historically been awarded to M/WBEs at 
a level commensurate with their representation in the marketplace. That is changing 
as the City undertakes a range of efforts to boost M/WBE participation. For 
example, under Local Law 1, in Fiscal Year 2014 the City awarded $690 million to 
certified M/WBEs in all prime and subcontracts, for a 57 percent increase over 
Fiscal Year 2013.

But this is not enough. In addition to increasing M/WBE program participation, the 
City can better increase M/WBE participation, even when not subject to Local Law. 
The City will aim to continue our positive trend and award more than $16 billion to 
M/WBEs over the next ten years. This target assumes that there will not be major 
downward deviations in economic conditions and that the City is able to win the 
changes in state and local law that we seek to give us the legal flexibility necessary to 
boost M/WBE participation to these levels.  To be clear, this goal is a floor, not a 
ceiling, and includes all City contracts—not just those subject to the M/WBE program.

258

Diverse and Inclusive Governmentnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Year

Total  
M/WBEs

2011

3,244

2012

3,526

2013

3,700

2014

3,783

Annual City M/WBE Compliance Reports, 
2011-14.

Initiative 1
Increase the number of certified M/WBEs

As of July 2014, there were 3,783 certified M/WBEs in New York City—a slight 
increase from 3,700 in July 2013. The City sponsored 20 certification workshops in 
Fiscal Year 2014, with community partners supplementing this outreach with 
marketing workshops, networking events, and business development services. 
However, there are still opportunities for increased support during the certification 
process, which the City continues to streamline. These include the use of the 
recently-launched New York City online certification portal and increased outreach 
to firms that could be eligible. We will engage in a marketing push to attract  M/
WBEs, with a special focus on those that could support OneNYC initiatives. These 
efforts will be undertaken in conjunction with Small Business First and efforts to 
reform procurement processes in the City.

Initiative 2
Increase the rates at which agencies utilize M/WBEs

Across contracts of all sizes, M/WBEs are still underutilized. Increasing agency 
utilization will require support from the City. We will provide agencies with 
additional tools to support their utilization of M/WBEs and hold them accountable 
for using them. We will invest in additional capacity building services for M/WBEs, 
and increase the use of strategies proven to support M/WBEs, including prequalified 
lists and pre-bid conferences. We will negotiate modifications to the City’s Project 
Labor Agreements that will be more M/WBE-friendly and, where appropriate, 
encourage agencies to elevate the role of M/WBE officers and identify and cultivate 
M/WBEs’ relationships with contracting agencies. 

Initiative 3
Expand legal tools to induce greater usage of M/WBEs

New York City is undertaking a disparity study in accordance with Local Law 1. The 
results of this study will help inform M/WBE goals, which will be included in the future 
OneNYC progress update. The City will seek to amend legal and policy barriers to 
greater M/WBE awards in City procurement, including seeking State legislative changes 
designed to increase M/WBE participation, and presenting proposed changes to the 
Procurement Policy Board (PPB) rules to expand “best value” as a basis for procurement.

259

Diverse and Inclusive Governmentnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Performance Tracking

Goal: Systematically track performance of equity 
outcomes to ensure OneNYC is making a positive 
and equitable impact on all New York City 
communities

Overview
New York City does not have a consistent and centralized way to ensure physical 
interventions—such as those called for by OneNYC—have an impact on all residents 
in an equitable way. Collecting data at a population-wide level, rather than 
disaggregating it, can mask deep problems and deprive the City of the ability to 
identify when initiatives may have unintentionally disparate impacts on certain 
communities. For example, tracking marijuana arrests by race allowed the City to 
see that African-American and Latino New Yorkers were being arrested at far higher 
rates than white New Yorkers even though research has shown that, across racial 
groups, people use marijuana at roughly similar rates. This led to policy reform.

Going forward, the City will systematically track metrics on opportunity, progress, 
and livability across all of New York City’s traditionally disadvantaged groups. We 
will establish a cross-agency group to oversee the collection, analysis, and internal 
reporting of the data at the agency level. The City will use this data to support 
agencies in making decisions around OneNYC and other initiatives designed to 
better support equitable outcomes.

260

Diverse and Inclusive Governmentnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative 1
Issue an Executive Order requiring regular compilation 
and use of equity metrics

We will issue a Mayoral Executive Order requiring the Social Indicator Report, 
which analyzes the social, economic, and environmental health of the city, to break 
out measurements by traditionally disadvantaged groups and to gather that data 
where it is not currently being collected. This and additional reports, such as those 
being developed by the Young Men’s Initiative, DOHMH, and others, will also bring 
attention to disparities. Through these reports, we can ensure that policy decisions 
advance the Mayor's equity platform.

261

Diverse and Inclusive Governmentnyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Indicators

In order to track our progress toward meeting the goals detailed in OneNYC, we developed a set of key indicators 
that will be reported on an annual basis.*  These 55 quantitative indicators are designed to hold us accountable 
while providing instructive data on the effectiveness of OneNYC programs and policies.  They are critical to  
maintaining transparency, but also represent the means by which we will assess our efforts. 

OneNYC includes many new indicators that reflect the expanded scope and breadth of the plan, as well as its  
emphasis on addressing issues of equity for our residents.  Several of the sustainability indicators overlap with 
past plans.  OneNYC annual Progress Reports will continue tracking past initiatives.

Indicator data is either provided by fiscal year or calendar year, depending on the data source; for some data, 
there is a multi-year time lag due to data availability.

*OneNYC has a total of 27 goals, 21 of which have goal-level indicators.  
The remaining six will be tracked at the initiative level in the annual Progress Report.

262

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Vision Goal

Indicator

Population

Median household income

Gross City Product growth

Total number of jobs 

Vision-level Indicators

Number of jobs accessible to the average New Yorker 
within 45 minutes by transit

Target

9 million

Increase

Outperform national economy 
annually

4.896 million by 2040

1.8 million by 2040

Share of New Yorkers that can access at least 200,000 
jobs within 45 minutes by transit

90% by 2040

Number of housing units issued New Building Permits 

240,000 total between 2015 and 
2024    250,000-300,000 
between 2024 and 2040

Figure for most  
recent year

8.4 million

$52,250

$647 billion

4.166 million

1.4 million

83%

200,180

New York City will have the space and assets to be a global economic leader and grow quality jobs across a diverse range of sectors

Industry Expansion 
& Cultivation

Number of jobs in the City

Share of jobs in innovation industries

Median household income

Gross City Product growth

4.896 million by 2040

4.166 million

20% by 2040

Increase

Outperform national economy 
annually

Y
T

I

C

 

G
N

I

V

I

R
H
T

 

,

G
N

I

W
O
R
G

 

R
U
O

 

:

1

 

N
O

I

S

I

V

New York City will have a workforce equipped with the skills needed to participate in the 21st century economy

Workforce Development

Number of individuals receiving industry-focused training 
each year

Labor force participation rate

Increase from 61%

30,000 by 2020

Number of NYC public school students attaining 
Associate’s or Bachelor’s degrees

Increase

New Yorkers will have access to affordable, high-quality housing coupled with robust infrastructure and neighborhood services

Housing Supply  
& Affordability

Number of new construction affordable housing units

80,000 by 2024

Number of affordable housing units preserved

120,000 by 2024

Total new construction permits issued (affordable and 
market rate housing units)

240,000 by 2024 and additional 
250,000 to 300,000 by 2040

All New Yorkers will have easy access to cultural resources and activities

Culture

Number of public cultural and civic events in community 
districts with the highest rates of poverty and lowest rates 
of public cultural and civic programming

Increase

15%

$52,250 

647 billion

61%

8,900

N/A

6,191 units

11,185 units

 22,801 units

N/A

New York City’s transportation network will be reliable, safe, sustainable, and accessible, meeting the needs of all New Yorkers and supporting the city’s 
growing economy

Overall rail transit capacity into the Manhattan core 
measure (8am-9am) 

20% Increase (2040)

627,890 (2015)

Transportation

NYC In-Season Commuter Cycling Index

844 (2020)

Share of cargo volumes by rail

Share of cargo volumes by water

Increase by 5% (2040)

Increase by 3% (2040)

Every resident and business will have access to affordable, reliable, high-speed broadband service everywhere by 2025

Broadband

 

Number of NYers with (affordable, reliable, high-speed) 
internet service at home 

100% by 2025

% of New Yorkers with access to free public WiFi within 
1/8th of a mile from home

Cover a crucial mass of  
 public spaces

% of commercial enterprises with access to fast, 
affordable, reliable connection at 1 gbps (gigabits per 
second) or higher

100% by 2025

437

2.3% (2007)

5% (2007)

78.10%

13.90%

N/A

263

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Vision Goal

Indicator

Target

Poverty Rate: Number of New Yorkers in or near poverty

Vision-level indicator

Premature mortality rate

800,000 people lifted out of 
poverty or near poverty by 2025

143.32 deaths per 100,000 (25% 
decrease) and dramatically 
decrease racial/ethnic disparities 
by 2040

Figure for most  
recent year

3.7 million

191.09 deaths per 
100,000

Median household income

Increase

$52,250 

Every child in New York City will be nurtured, will be protected, and will thrive

Infant mortality rate

Early childhood

3.7 infant deaths per 1,000 live 
births (20% decrease) and 
dramatically reducing racial and 
ethnic disparities by 2040

4.6 infant deaths per 
1,000 live births

New Yorkers of all ages will live, work, learn, and play in neighborhoods that promote an active and healthy lifestyle

Number of 4-year-olds enrolled in full day Pre-K 

Increase

53,230

Healthy neighborhoods, 
active living

Average number of servings of fruits and vegetables that 
adult New Yorkers eat per day

3 mean servings (25% increase) 
by 2035

2.4 mean servings

Percentage of adult New Yorkers that meet physical 
activity recommendations

Percentage of NYC public high school students who 
report meeting recommended levels of aerobic physical 
activity

Rate of asthma emergency department visits by children 

80% (2035)

30% (2035)

67%

19%

224 per 10,000 (25% decrease) 
by 2035

299 per 10,000

All New Yorkers will have access to the physical and mental healthcare services that they need

Access to healthcare

Percentage of New Yorkers that felt that they received the 
medical care that they have needed in the past 12 months

Percentage of New Yorkers with a serious psychological 
distress that received mental health treatment in the past 
year

Increase

Increase

89%

44%

Among large U.S. cities, New York will continue to be the safest, and will have the lowest rate of incarceration, with a criminal justice system that leads the 
nation in fairness and efficiency

 

Y
T

I

C

 

E
L
B
A
T

I

U
Q
E

 

D
N
A

 

T
S
U
J
 

R
U
O

 

:

2

 

N
O

I

S

I

V

Criminal justice reform

Crime rate

Average daily population (ADP) in jail

Percentage of domestic violence victims turned away 
from shelters

Decrease

Decrease

Decrease

New Yorkers will continue to embrace Vision Zero and accept no traffic fatalities on New York City streets

Vision Zero

Number of traffic fatalities

Number of serious injuries due to traffic collisions

Vision Goal

Indicator

0

0

Target

Greenhouse gas emissions reductions relative to 2005

80% reduction by 2050 relative 
to 2005

Vision-level indicator

Reduction in total waste disposed relative to 2005

90% reduction by 2030

The New York City’s greenhouse gas emissions will be 80 percent lower by 2050 than in 2005

Reduce risk of stormwater flooding in most affected 
communiites

Decrease

110,023 crimes

11,408

48%

255

3,766

Figure for most  
recent year

19%

12%

 

R
U
O

 

:

3

 

N
O

I

S

I

V

Y
T

I

C

 

E
L
B
A
N

I

A
T
S
U
S

80x50

Greenhouse gas emissions reductions relative to 2005

80% reduction by 2050 relative 
to 2005

19%

264

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Vision Goal

Indicator

Target

Figure for most  
recent year

New York City will send zero waste to landfills by 2030

90% reduction by 2030 from 
2005 baseline

3,193,800 tons

Zero Waste

Volume of DSNY-collected refuse (excluding material 
collected for reuse/recycling) relative to 2005 baseline of 
~3.6M tons

Curbside and Containerized Diversion Rate

Citywide diversion rate (including all streams of waste: 
residential, commercial, construction and demolition, and fill)

Increase

Increase

New York City will have the best air quality among all large U.S. cities by 2030

Air-quality ranking among major U.S. cities 

1st

15.40%

52%

4th

Air quality

Disparity in SO2 across city neighborhoods

Disparity in PM2.5 levels across city neighborhoods

50% reduction (2.25 ppb) by 
2030

20% reduction (5.32 mg/m3) by 
2030

4.51 ppb, range in 
winter average across 
CDs in 2013

6.65 mg/m3 range 
annual average across 
CDs 2013

New York City will clean up contaminated land to address disproportionately high exposures in low-income communities and convert land to safe and 
beneficial us

Brownfields

Number of tax lots remediated since January 1, 2014

750 (Q1, 2019)

71

New York City will mitigate neighborhood flooding and offer high-quality water services

Violations with Safe Drinking Water Act

No SDWA violations

0 violations of SDWA 

Water management

Backlog of catch basin repairs

Combined Sewer Overflow capture rate

All New Yorkers will benefit from useful, accessible, and beautiful open spaces

Parks and natural resources

Percentage of New Yorkers living within a walking 
distance of a park

Maintain < 1%

Increasing

85% by 2030

0.25%

78%

79.50%

D
E
U
N

I

T
N
O
C

 

Y
T

I

C

 

E
L
B
A
N

I

A
T
S
U
S

 

R
U
O

 

:
3
 

N
O

I

S

I

V

Vision Goal

Indicator

Target

Figure for most  
recent year

Y
T

I

C

 

T
N
E

I

L

I

S
E
R

 

R
U
O

 

:

4

 

N
O

I

S

I

V

Vision-level indicators

Eliminate disaster-related long-term displacement of New 
Yorkers from homes by 2050

Eliminate by 2050

Reduce the Social Vulnerability Index for neighborhoods 
across the city

Reduce average annual economic losses resulting from 
climate related events

Reduce

Reduce

Every city neighborhood will be safer by strengthening community, social, and economic resiliency

Neighborhoods

Capacity of accessible emergency shelters 

Rate of volunteerism among New Yorkers

120,000

25% by 2020

The city’s buildings will be upgraded against changing climate impacts

Buildings

Percentage of households in the 100-year floodplain with 
flood insurance policies

Increase

Square footage of buildings upgraded against flood risk

Increase

N/A

4

$1.7B

10,000

18%

55%

N/A

Number of elevated homes in the Build-it-Back program

Increase

31 underway

Infrastructure systems across the region will adapt to maintain continued services

Infrastructure

Customer-hours of weather-related utility and transit 
space service outages

Decrease

Percentage of hospital and long-term care beds 
benefitting from facility retrofits for resiliency

100% by 2020

New York City’s coastal defenses will be strengthened against flooding and sea level rise

Coastal Defense

Linear feet of coastal defenses completed

Acres of coastal ecosystems restored

Number of residents benefiting from coastal defenses and 
restored ecosystems

Increase

Increase

Increase

N/A

79%

36,500

N/A

200,000

265

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Summary of 
Initiatives

The table below shows the funding status and funding source for each OneNYC initiative and supporting initiative. 
Specific funding details for newly funded initiatives are available in a separate table featured in the FY’16 
Message of the Mayor, and are marked with an asterisk. 

KEY FOR CHART

Funded*/Partially funded* 
Funded 
Partially funded 
Budget neutral 
In planning 
Call for action 

Funding detail available in FY ‘16 Message of the Mayor (visit nyc.gov/omb)
Funded in 2014
Some resources provided by City or other sources
Initiative requires no new resources and/or funds were reallocated within agency budget
The City has begun planning or feasibility study for this initiative
The City will work with other governmental or private entities to secure funding or enact legislative change

266

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative

Supporting Initatives

Lead Agency/
Agencies

Funding 
Status

Funding 
Source(s)

Vision 1: Our Growing, Thriving City

INDUSTRY EXPANSION AND CULTIVATION

 

Initiative 1
Maintain New York as the global 
capital for innovation by 
supporting high-growth, 
high-value industries 

Initiative 2
Make triple bottom line 
investments in infrastructure and 
City-owned assets to capture 
economic, environmental, and 
social returns

Initiative 3
Foster an environment in which 
small businesses can succeed 

A. Maintain and grow New York City’s traditional economic sectors.

DCP and 
others

Budget 
neutral

N/A

B. Ensure that businesses in emerging sectors are able to find and fit 
out the space they need to start, grow, and scale their companies.

EDC

In planning

N/A

A. Support a state-of-the-art food production and distribution 

EDC

Funded*

City capital

industry.

B. Activate the City’s industrial assets to support the creation of 

EDC

Funded*

City capital

quality jobs. 

A. Reduce the regulatory burden on small businesses through the 

SBS

Funded*

City capital

Small Business First plan.

WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

Initiative 1
Train New Yorkers in high-growth 
industries, creating an inclusive 
workforce across the city

A. Establish and expand Industry Partnerships. 

B. Use Common Metrics for workforce programs.

C. Create bridge programs to prepare low-skill job seekers.

1

 

N
O

I

S

I

V

Initiative 2
Leverage OneNYC investments 
to train and employ New Yorkers 
of all skill levels 

D. Ease path to employment for formerly incarcerated people.

A. Leverage City  investments to create jobs and training 

opportunities for New Yorkers, and encourage targeted hiring.

B. Capitalize on the Career Pathways Construction Industry 

Partnership to create and expand construction training and 
employment opportunities for traditionally underrepresented New 
Yorkers.

C. Support the creation of, and training for, green jobs

SBS

Mayor’s 
Offfice

DYCD, 
Mayor’s 
Offfice

Mayor’s 
Offfice

SBS

SBS

Funded*

Funded*

City operating

City capital 
and operating

Funded*

City operating

Budget 
neutral

Funded*

Regulatory/
legislative

City capital 
and operating

Funded*

City operating

DEP, Mayor's 
Office

Funded

City operating

Initiative 3
Ensure that all New York City 
students have access to an 
education that enables them to 
build 21st century skills through 
real-world, work-based learning 
experiences

A. Significantly expand access to computer science/technology 

DOE

In planning

N/A

education across New York City public schools by 2020.

B. Strengthen and expand Career and Technical Education programs.

DOE

C. Expand Transition Coordination Centers to every borough by 2020 
to improve postsecondary outcomes for students with disabilities. 

DOE

In planning

In planning

N/A

N/A

Initiative 4
Increase postsecondary 
attainment

D. Explore the opportunity to create bilingual learning environments 

DOE

to promote multilingualism among New York City students.

Budget 
neutral

City operating

Increase postsecondary attainment by promoting high-school 
graduation, college matriculation and degree completion.  

CUNY, DOE

Funded

City operating

267

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative

Supporting Initatives

Lead Agency/
Agencies

Funding 
Status

Funding 
Source(s)

HOUSING

Initiative 1
Create and preserve 200,000 
affordable housing units over ten 
years to alleviate New Yorkers’ 
rent burden and meet the needs 
of a diverse population. Support 
efforts by the private market to 
produce 160,000 additional new 
units of housing over ten years 
to accommodate a growing 
population.

Initiative 2
Support efforts to create new 
housing and jobs throughout the 
region

Initiative 3
Expand housing and related 
services to support the city’s 
most vulnerable populations 

1

 

N
O

I

S

I

V

A. Maximize the use of City-owned land for new housing. 

HPD, EDC

Funded*

City capital

B. Conduct collaborative, holistic neighborhood planning to support 

HPD, DCP

new mixed-income housing creation with supporting 
infrastructure and services. 

C. Establish a Mandatory Inclusionary Housing program to promote 

HPD, DCP

economic diversity and affordable housing development. 

D. Expand opportunities for minority- and women- owned 

enterprises and expand the pool of developers building affordable 
housing. 

HPD, SBS & 
others

E. Support and expand efforts to preserve affordable units through 

HPD, DCP

neighborhood planning and outreach. 

Budget 
neutral

Budget 
neutral

Budget 
neutral

Budget 
neutral

City capital

Regulatory/
legislative

N/A

N/A

F. Foster large-scale development at potential major site 

assemblages. 

HPD, DCP, 
EDC

In planning

N/A

A. Collaborate with regional municipalities and housing agencies on 

DCP

shared priorities.

Budget 
neutral

City operating

A. Strengthen community-based homelessness prevention systems.

DHS

Funded*

City operating

B. Create a more streamlined process for intake, assessment, and 

HPD, DHS

Funded*

City operating

rehousing to end veteran homelessness.

C. Develop affordable housing appropriate to community needs, 
including housing for families, supportive housing, and senior 
housing. 

HPD

Funded*

City capital

D. Expand rental assistance and aftercare to support individuals 

transitioning from shelters to permanent housing.

DHS, HPD, 
NYCHA

Funded*

City operating

E. Expand housing options for people with disabilities by increasing 
oversight, targeting placement strategies, and accessing housing 
subsidies.

HPD

Funded*

City operating

F. Advocate for state and federal funding to increase supportive 

housing production.

HPD, Mayor's 
Office

Budget 
neutral

Regulatory/
legislative

THRIVING NEIGHBORHOODS

Initiative 1
Support creation of vibrant 
neighborhoods by alleviating 
barriers to mixed-use 
development and utilizing 
available financing tools 

Initiative 2
Make strategic investments for 
livable neighborhoods  

A. Pursue neighborhood planning strategies that expand 

SBS, DCP

Funded*

City operating

opportunities for mixed-use development, and especially for 
attraction of retail and services to underserved neighborhoods. 

B. Maximize the use of available financing tools that assist the 

SBS, DCP

Funded*

City operating

commercial components of mixed-use projects to support vibrant 
mixed-use neighborhoods.

Make strategic investments for livable neighborhoods.  

DCP

Budget 
neutral

City capital 
and operating

268

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative

Supporting Initatives

Lead Agency/
Agencies

Funding 
Status

Funding 
Source(s)

CULTURE

Initiative 1
Ensure well-used, high-quality 
cultural facilities and 
programming in all 
neighborhoods

A. Provide funding and capacity-building support to local cultural 

DCLA

Funded*

City operating

organizations to create public art and programming in 
underserved areas. 

B. Facilitate cultural partnerships, such as artists-in-residence, in 

DCLA

Funded*

City operating

public agencies.

C. Streamline the permitting process in order to increase access to 

DCLA

public spaces and facilities for community events.

Budget 
neutral

N/A

D. Increase use of parks and public spaces by expanding cultural, 

DCLA

In planning

N/A

educational, and civic engagement programming available to the 
public. 

TRANSPORTATION

Initiative 1
Support full funding of the MTA 
capital plan

Initiative 2
Improve existing transit services

The City will look to every level of government to support the 
modernization and expansion of New York's transit system.

DOT & others

Partial funding MTA & others

A. Relieve congestion on major subway corridors.

DOT & MTA

Partial funding MTA

B. Improve and expand bus transit throughout the City.

DOT & MTA

Funded*/  
partial funding

City capital 
and operating, 
& MTA

Partial funding PANYNJ, 

AMTRAK & 
others

1

 

N
O

I

S

I

V

Initiative 3
Plan for major expansions of the 
transit network 

A. Develop a regional transit strategy to address the growing number 

of commuters from west of the Hudson River.

PANYNJ, 
AMTRAK & 
others

B. Study new subway routes in underserved communities and other 

MTA

Call for action MTA

improvements to the subway network.

C. Expand the ferry network.

EDC

Funded*

City capital 
and operating

D. Expand and improve service to and within Staten Island.

DOT & MTA

Call for 
action/ budget 
neutral

MTA/City 
capital and 
operating

A. Continue to expand the City’s bike lane network, especially to 

DOT

Funded*

City operating

Initiative 4
Expand the City’s bike network

neighborhoods with limited bike infrastructure.

B. Improve bike access on bridges.

C. Expand bike share.

Initiative 5
Expand the accessibility of the 
City’s transportation network to 
people with disabilities

A. Increase accessibility of the pedestrian network to people with 

disabilities.

B. Improve accessibility to bus services for transit users with 

disabilities.

DOT

DOT

DOT

DOT

Funded*

Funded

Funded*

Funded*

C. Improve convenience and reliability of modes of transit for New 

MTA, TLC

Funded

Yorkers with disabilities.

Initiative 6
The City will make the trucking 
sector greener and more efficient, 
and continue to expand freight 
movement via rail and water 
where possible 

A. Encourage water and rail freight to the New York region through 

PANYNJ, EDC Call for action

projects such as the Cross-Harbor Rail Tunnel and Brooklyn 
Marine Terminals.

B. Reduce the impact of the trucks that must bring freight “the last 

DOT, EDC

mile” to market.

Partially 
funded*

City capital 
and operating

Private

City capital 
and federal

City capital 
and operating

City 
operating, 
private

City capital, 
federal, & 
PANYNJ 
funding

City operating

C. Expand JFK Airport's air freight activity.

PANYNJ, EDC Call for action

PANYNJ

269

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative

Supporting Initatives

Lead Agency/
Agencies

Funding 
Status

Funding 
Source(s)

TRANSPORTATION

Initiative 7
Expand airport capacity

Work with PANYNJ, NY State, and the Federal Government to 
expand flight capacity and improve airport facilities and terminals in 
the region’s airports, particularly LaGuardia and JFK.

Call for action

PANYNJ

Initiative 8
Provide reliable, convenient 
transit access to all three of the 
region's major airports

Work with the Port Authority, the MTA, and the State of New York to 
develop a plan for better transit options in the longer term to LGA.

PA, MTA, NYS Call for action

PANYNJ

Initiative 9
Improve the City's roads, bridges, 
and highways

Department of Transportation Bridge and Highway Structure 
Rehabilitation/Reconstruction Program; and Street Reconstruction 
and Resurfacing Program.

DOT

Funded*

City capital

INFRASTRUCTURE PLANNING

Initiative 1
Secure funding sources that are 
equitable, sustainable, and 
dedicated to our core 
infrastructure

Initiative 2
Maximize the economic, 
environmental, and social 
benefits of infrastructure 
investments

Initiative 3
Enhance capital project delivery 

1

 

N
O

I

S

I

V

A. Advocate for robust federal commitment to funding infrastructure. Mayor's Office Call for action

Federal

B. Leverage land-use actions to encourage infrastructure 

DCP

investments.

Budget 
neutral

Regulatory/
legislative

The City should maintain a focus on achieving a state of good repair 
for its infrastructure assets while prioritizing projects that are socially, 
fiscally, and environmentally advantageous. 

Mayor's Office, 
DCP

Budget 
neutral

N/A

A. Reform state laws to enable design-build.

DOT, Mayor's 
Office

Budget 
neutral

Regulatory/
legislative

B. Expand the Accelerated Work Program.

DEP, DDC

Funded

City capital

C. Improve project scoping and design to improve green-building 

Mayor's Office

Funded*

City operating

and save costs.

D. Modernize project delivery requirements and project management 

processes.

Mayor's Office Budget 
neutral

N/A

BROADBAND

Initiative 1
Promote competition in the 
residential and commercial 
broadband markets

Initiative 2
Provide high-speed, residential 
Internet service for low-income 
communities currently without  
service

Initiative 3
Increase investment in 
broadband corridors to reach 
high-growth business districts, 
with a focus on outer borough 
neighborhoods

Initiative 4
Promote seamless user 
experience across public 
networks to create high-speed 
access across the boroughs

Create new or expanded franchises and alternative service models 
to expand infrastructure and produce more competition and 
increase affordability by 2025. 

Mayor’s Office, 
DoITT

Budget 
neutral

Legislative/
regulatory

Invest in networks providing high-speed residential access either 
free or at low-cost for low-income communities.

Mayor’s Office, 
DoITT

Partially 
funded*

City capital 
and operating

Mayor’s Office, 
EDC

Partially 
funded

City capital 
and operating, 
State

Ensure a successful citywide roll-out of LinkNYC network; Cover 
critical mass of the city's public spaces with free Wi-Fi by 2025.

Mayor’s 
Office,DoITT

Budget 
neutral

Private

270

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative

Supporting Initatives

Lead Agency/
Agencies

Funding 
Status

Funding 
Source(s)

1
 

N
O

I

S

I

V

BROADBAND

Initiative 5
Explore innovative ways to 
provide high-speed Internet to 
homes, businesses, and the 
public

Conduct research on latest broadband developments and trends to 
help inform the City’s strategy on connectivity. 

Mayor’s Office, 
DoITT

In planning

N/A

Vision 2: Our Just and Equitable City

EARLY CHILDHOOD

Initiative 1
Nurture and protect all infants so 
they thrive during their first year 
of life and beyond 

Initiative 2
Offer free, full-day, high-quality 
pre-kindergarten for every 
four-year-old to ensure all New 
York children have the 
opportunity to enter elementary 
school with a solid foundation for 
future success

Initiative 3
Develop a comprehensive plan 
for high-quality early childcare

A. Create neighborhood spaces dedicated to advancing women's 

DOHMH

In planning

N/A

health.

B. Expand the number of “baby-friendly” hospitals to promote 

DOHMH

Funded*

City operating

access to breastmilk for newborns.

Continue to focus on developing high-quality early childhood 
programs through teacher recruitment and training as well as through 
increased support for students whose native language is not English, 
students with disabilities, and students from high-need areas. 

DOE

Funded*

City operating

Develop a plan to close the gap in access to childcare.

ACS

Budget 
neutral

City operating

INTEGRATED SOCIAL & GOVERNMENT SERVICES DELIVERY

Initiative 1
Transform schools into 
Community Schools

Initiative 2
Establish Neighborhood Health 
Hubs that co-locate clinical 
health and mental health services 
with social services and City 
agencies to foster improved 
coordination

Initiative 3
Enhance the digital capabilities of 
NYC 311 to provide easier 
connections to government and 
community services and 
information

Initiative 4
Expand the City’s internal data 
integration capacity to help 
ensure clients receive the right 
resources and service at the 
right times

Implement key system-building initiatives to strengthen Community 
Schools.

DOE

Funded*

City operating

Launch Neighborhood Health Hubs in neighborhoods with high 
health disparities.

DOHMH

Partially 
funded*

City operating

Develop ways to enhance the digital experience of New York City 
residents so they can receive services and information in a more 
efficient and simple manner.

DoITT & 
others

Budget 
Neutral

City capital

With greater investments in integrated data systems, the City will 
also be able to better track the results of its programs. 

Mayor’s Office, 
DoITT

Partially 
funded*

City operating

2

 

N
O

I

S

I

V

271

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative

Supporting Initatives

Lead Agency/
Agencies

Funding 
Status

Funding 
Source(s)

HEALTHY NEIGHBORHOODS, ACTIVE LIVING

Initiative 1
Improve food access, 
affordability, and quality, and 
encourage a sustainable, resilient 
food system 

A. Increase the share of regional food in the NYC food system 
through investments in the regional food distribution system.

EDC, Mayor's 
Office

Budget 
neutral

N/A

B. Expand and improve quality of New York City school food.

DOE, SCA

Funded*

City capital

C. Ensure all communities have access to fresh food retail options, 

with special focus on traditionally underserved neighborhoods.

DOHMH,  
Mayor’s Office

Budget 
neutral

D. Support community gardens and urban farms in select 

neighborhoods in the city.

Mayor's Office 
& others

Partially 
funded

Initiative 2
Create environments that 
encourage New Yorkers to be 
physically active regardless of 
age

Initiative 3
Address health hazards in homes

A. Increase opportunities for physical activity in and around schools.

DOE

B. Increase design elements that promote physical activity in 

DOHMH/DDC

buildings.

C. Provide opportunities for physical activity in the community for 

DPR/DOHMH

residents of all abilities.

A. Reduce asthma triggers in the home.

NYCHA

B. Decrease secondhand smoke exposure in the home.

DOHMH/DOB

C. Reduce housing-related fall hazards for older adults.

DOHMH

Funded

Budget 
neutral

Partially 
funded

Partially 
funded*

Budget 
neutral

Budget 
neutral

HEALTHCARE ACCESS

2

 

N
O

I

S

I

V

City 
operating, 
private

Private

City capital

N/A

City capital

City capital

Regulatory/
legislative

City operating

Initiative 1
Ensure all New York City 
neighborhoods have access to 
high-quality essential healthcare 
services

Initiative 2
Transform NYC Health and 
Hospitals Corporation into a 
system anchored by community-
based preventive care

Initiative 3
Expand access to primary care 
by establishing health clinics in 
high-need communities

Initiative 4
Expand access points for mental 
health and substance abuse care, 
including integrating primary care 
and behavioral health services

Initiative 5
Work with New York State in 
enabling and supporting
the transformation of the 
healthcare delivery system

We will fight for critical healthcare services across the City and not 
accept the closure of any more hospitals in Brooklyn or any other 
communities which would be left without the medical care we need.

HHC

Funded

Federal

A. Create health access points embedded in communities rather 

HHC

than hospital campuses.

B. Ensure critical hospital services are fully functioning in the face of 

HHC

increased demand, weather disasters, and aging infrastructure.

C. Adequately provide healthcare services to New York City’s 

HHC

growing senior population.

Budget 
neutral

HHC capital

Partially 
funded/ 
budget neutral

Federal, HHC 
capital

Budget 
neutral

HHC capital

Create at least 16 Health Clinics in primary care shortage areas.

DOHMH/HHC Funded*

City operating

Co-located and integrated behavioral healthcare in primary care 
through the integrated Collaborative Care model.

DOHMH/HHC Funded

City operating

A. Integrate patient data across healthcare systems.

HHC

Call for action

State

B. Transform the Medicaid reimbursement methodology.

DOHMH/HHC Partially 

State

funded/ Call 
for action

272

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative

Supporting Initatives

Lead Agency/
Agencies

Funding 
Status

Funding 
Source(s)

CRIMINAL JUSTICE REFORM

Initiative 1
Reduce crime and unnecessary 
incarceration 

A. Use advanced technology and integrated data to accurately and 

Mayor’s Office

Funded

effectively reduce crime.

B. Reduce crime through changes to criminal justice facilities that 

Mayor’s Office

Funded

will promote concepts of fairness and confidence in the law.

C. Enable crime prevention through environmental design. 

Mayor’s Office Partially 

funded

Asset 
forfeiture

Asset 
forfeiture, City 
operating

Asset 
forfeiture

2

 

N
O

I

S

I

V

Initiative 2
Build sustained neighborhood 
engagement to employ fairness 
as a crime reduction tool

Initiative 3
Use criminal-justice data-driven 
strategies to improve decision 
making and reduce crime and 
unnecessary incarceratio

Initiative 4
Ensure all victims of domestic 
violence have access to a shelter 
and necessary services

VISION ZERO

Initiative 1
Continue implementation of the 
Vision Zero Action Plan

Initiative 2
Use Borough Pedestrian Safety 
Action Plans to guide future 
engineering projects and 
enforcement priorities 

Initiative 3
Transform Dangerous Arterial 
Roads into Vision Zero Great 
Streets 

D. Reduce incarceration by examining risk, needs, programming, 

Mayor’s Office Partially 

City operating

and system flow.

funded

A. Create neighborhood CompStats with residents and City 

Mayor’s Office

Funded

agencies in high-distress neighborhoods.

B. Implement a regular citywide method of surveying resident 

Mayor’s Office Partially 

engagement.

funded

A. Introduce strategic tools for health and neighborhood safety.

Mayor’s Office

Funded

B. Build crime-and-incarceration-reduction strategic tools.

Mayor’s Office

Funded

Asset 
forfeiture

Asset 
forfeiture

Asset 
forfeiture

Asset 
forfeiture

Establish community-based Family Justice Centers.

Mayor’s Office Partially 

City operating

funded

Work closely with communities around the city to expand a bicycle 
network that improves safety for all road users.

DOT/DCAS

Funded

City capital

Each year through 2017, complete 50 Vision Zero safety projects at 
the priority corridors, intersections, and areas identified in the 
Borough Plans.

DOT

Funded

City capital 
and operating

Rethink and redesign major corridors in order to prevent serious 
crashes.

DOT

Funded*

City capital 
and operating

273

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative

Supporting Initatives

Lead Agency/
Agencies

Funding 
Status

Funding 
Source(s)

Vision 3: Our Sustainable City

80x50

Initiative 1
Develop near-term local actions 
and long-term regional strategies 
to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions from the power sector 

3

 

N
O

I

S

I

V

Initiative 2
Develop a mode shift action plan 
to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions from the transportation 
sector

Initiative 3
Build upon Zero Waste to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions from 
the solid waste sector 

Initiative 4
Continue implementation of One 
City: Built to Last to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions from 
buildings by 30 percent by 2025, 
and chart a long-term path away 
from fossil fuels 

ZERO WASTE

Initiative 1
Expand the NYC Organics 
program to serve all New Yorkers 
by the end of 2018 

Develop 80 x 50 action plan for the power sector.

A. Remove barriers to more efficient power generation and 

increased renewable power production.

B. Support the development of renewable power resources.

C. Increase the share of wind power in the City’s power mix.

D. Adopt smart grid technologies and reduce transmission 

bottlenecks.

E. Expand decentralized power production.

Mayor's 
Office

Mayor's 
Office

Mayor's 
Office

Mayor's 
Office

Mayor's 
Office

Mayor's 
Office

Budget 
neutral

Call for action

Call for action

Call for action

Call for action

City operating

Regulatory/
legislative 
(State & 
federal)

Regulatory/
legislative 
(State & 
federal)

Regulatory/
legislative 
(State & 
federal)

Regulatory/
legislative 
(State & 
federal)

Partially 
funded/   call 
for action

City capital, 
private

F. Achieve net-zero energy at in-city wastewater treatment plants 

(WWTP) by 2050.

DEP, Mayor's 
Office

Partially 
funded

City capital

Develop 80 x 50 action plan for the transportation sector.

A. Reduce carbon emissions from the City government vehicle fleet.

Develop 80 x 50 action plan for the solid waste sector.

Mayor's 
Office

DCAS, 
Mayor's 
Office

DSNY, 
Mayor's 
Office

DCAS, 
Mayor's 
Office

Budget 
neutral

Budget 
neutral

Budget 
neutral

City operating

City capital

City operating

Funded*

City capital 
and operating

Expansion of NYC Organics program.

DSNY

Partially 
funded*

City capital 
and operating

A. Develop additional organics sorting and processing capacity in 

DSNY

In planning

New York City and the region.

B. Process 250 tons of food waste per day at City WWTPs and 

DEP

assess long-term feasibility of scaling up processing of organic 
food waste.

Partially 
funded

C. Expand community composting opportunities in all five boroughs. DSNY/

Funded

GrowNYC

City capital, 
private

City capital

City operating, 
private

274

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative

Supporting Initatives

Lead Agency/
Agencies

Funding 
Status

Funding 
Source(s)

ZERO WASTE

Initiative 2
Enhance the City’s curbside 
recycling program by offering 
single-stream recycling by 2020

Initiative 3
Reduce the use of plastic bags 
and other non-compostable 
waste

Initiative 4
Give every New Yorker the 
opportunity to recycle and reduce 
waste, including at NYCHA 
housing

Initiative 5
Make all schools Zero Waste 
schools

Initiative 6 
Expand opportunities to reuse 
and recycle textiles and 
electronic waste

Initiative 7
Develop an equitable blueprint for 
a Save-As-You-Throw program to 
reduce waste

Initiative 8
Reduce commercial waste by 90 
percent by 2030

3

 

N
O

I

S

I

V

AIR QUALITY

Initiative 1
Enforce the updated DEP Air 
Pollution Control Code

Develop a plan to convert all curbside recycling collections from 
dual-stream to single-stream.

DSNY

In planning

N/A

A. Create and expand markets for recycled materials.

 

 

 

 

 

DSNY

DSNY

In planning

N/A

Budget 
neutral

Regulatory/
legislative

DSNY/
NYCHA

Budget 
neutral

Private

DSNY/DOE

DSNY

Partially 
funded*

Budget 
neutral

City operating

Private

DSNY

Funded*

City operating

A. Conduct a comprehensive study of commercial waste collection zones. BIC

Funded

City operating

B. Encourage periodic waste audits for large commercial buildings.

DSNY

C. Create a Zero Waste challenge program for large commercial 

DSNY

waste generators.

In planning

In planning

N/A

N/A

D. Revise the commercial recycling rules to make recycling easier for 

DSNY

In planning

N/A

businesses.

E. Require all food service establishments to source-separate food waste. DSNY

In planning

N/A

DEP

Funded*

City operating

Initiative 2 
Identify additional targeted 
air-quality improvements through 
data analysis and community 
engagement 

Expand the Environment and Health Data Portal (EHDP) to 
incorporate neighborhood-level sustainability indicators, create a 
neighborhood-level “Sustainability and Health” report, and develop 
an educational module on sustainability and health used for 
outreach in public schools and community based organizations.

DOHMH, 
Mayor’s Office

In planning

N/A

Initiative 3
Accelerate conversions of 
residual heating oil boilers in 
buildings

Initiative 4
Cut emissions from mobile 
sources

 

DCAS, 
Mayor’s Office

Budget 
neutral

City capital 
and operating

A. Reduce emissions from the City fleet.

DCAS, 
Mayor’s Office

Budget 
neutral

City capital

B. Reduce emissions from private truck fleets and for-hire vehicles.

C. Reduce emissions from vehicle idling and toll crossing.

DOT

MTA

Call for action

Federal

Budget neutral/
call for action

Regulatory/
legislation, & 
MTA

275

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative

Supporting Initatives

Lead Agency/
Agencies

Funding 
Status

Funding 
Source(s)

BROWNFIELDS

Establish the Brownfield Jumpstart program to provide higher levels 
of City funding for environmental investigations and cleanup.

OER

Funded*

City operating

Initiative 1
Accelerate cleanup of 
brownfields to improve public 
safety and encourage private 
investment in new development 
on brownfield sites

Initiative 2
Support community engagement 
by establishing Place-Based 
Community Brownfield Planning 
Areas

Initiative 3 
Facilitate clean-up of properties 
in coastal flood zones to reduce 
environmental risks from storm 
surge

 

 

WATER MANAGEMENT

Initiative 1
Protect the City’s water supply 
and maintain the reliability and 
resiliency of the water supply 
system

Initiative 2
Install or repair 500 water 
fountains and water bottle refilling 
stations across the five boroughs

Initiative 3
Expand green infrastructure and 
smart design for stormwater 
management in neighborhoods 
across the city

3

 

N
O

I

S

I

V

 

 

Continue the NYC Green Infrastructure Program in areas served by 
the combined sewer system to reduce Combined Sewer Overflow, 
and expand the use of green infrastructure to other parts of the city.

A. Alleviate flooding in Southeast Queens.

Initiative 4
Reduce pollution from 
stormwater runoff

 

PARKS & NATURAL RESOURCES

OER

OER

Budget 
neutral

City operating

Budget 
neutral

City operating

DEP

Funded*

City capital

DEP/DOH

Budget 
neutral

City operating

DEP

Funded*

City capital

DEP

DEP

Funded*

City capital

Budget 
neutral

City operating

Community Parks Initiative Phase II.

DPR

Funded*

City capital 
and operating

Parks Without Borders.

DPR

Funded*

City capital

Initiative 1
Strengthen the utility of parks and 
public space in under-resourced 
and growing neighborhoods

Initiative 2 
Improve outdoor spaces through 
Parks Without Borders, a new 
strategy to enhance 
neighborhood access and 
connectivity

Initiative 3
Reduce light pollution from large 
buildings at night

 

Mayor’s Office, 
DCAS

Budget 
neutral

Initiative 4
Expand the use of our streets as 
places to play, congregate, and 
be together 

Public Plaza maintenance.

DOT

Funded*

City capital, 
regulatory/
legislative

City 
operating, 
private

276

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative

Supporting Initatives

Lead Agency/
Agencies

Funding 
Status

Funding 
Source(s)

PARKS & NATURAL RESOURCES

3
 

N
O

I

S

I

V

Initiative 5
Create beautiful and well-tended 
streets in neighborhoods across 
the city

Initiative 6 
Green the city’s streets, parks, 
and open spaces

Enhancements to medians.

DOT

Funded

City capital

Tree plantings across five boroughs.

DPR

Budget 
neutral

City capital

Vision 4: Our Resilient City

NEIGHBORHOODS

Initiative 1
Strengthen community-based 
organizations

Work to build capacity in communities by strengthening community-
based organizations that serve their neighbors and by working to 
expand civic engagement and volunteerism. 

Funded*

City capital 
and operating

Mayor's 
Office, DYCD, 
NYC Service, 
DoITT

Initiative 2
Improve emergency 
preparedness and planning

Initiative 3
Support small businesses and 
local commercial corridors 

Initiative 4
Ensure that workforce 
development is a part of all 
resiliency investments 

Initiative 5
Mitigate the risks of heat

BUILDINGS

Initiative 1
Upgrade public and private city 
buildings 

4

 

N
O

I

S

I

V

Secure and bolster operations and physical assets for emergency 
response,and expand public education efforts on how to prepare for 
and respond to extreme weather events and other disasters.

Mayor's 
Office, NYC 
EM, FDNY

Provide financial investments, technical assistance and tailored 
resources regarding preparedness and resiliency  to small 
businesses and commercial corridors. 

Mayor's 
Office, SBS, 
DOT

Funded

Funded

City capital 
and operating

Federal and 
State

Ensure that all investments in resiliency will create job opportunities 
for residents and low-income applicants, and build on successful 
workforce development models to encourage the hiring of 
Sandy-impacted residents.

Mayor's 
Office

Budget 
neutral

City operating 
and federal

Take steps to mitigate the risks of heat in order to reduce 
heat-realted illnesses and deaths, and reduce disparities in 
vulnerability to climate change.

DOHMH, 
Mayor's 
Office

In planning

N/A

Adapt vulnerable building stock to withstand the risks of climate 
change and extreme weather events. 

Mayor's Office, 
DDC

Funded

Federal 
funding

Initiative 2 
Adopt policies to support building 
upgrades 

Develop and adopt policies that facilitate investments in building 
resiliency, including evaluating land use as a tool to promote 
resiliency across the city.

Mayor's 
Office

Budget 
neutral

City operating

Initiative 3
Work to reform FEMA’s National 
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)

Pursue a comprehensive set of activities to promote investments in 
physical risk reduction, and policies that promote insurance 
affordability.

Mayor's 
Office

Budget 
neutral

City operating

INFRASTRUCTURE

Initiative 1 
Adapt the region’s infrastructure 
systems

Continue to pursue programs to coordinate resiliency investments 
across City agencies and with other infrastructure providers and 
operators.

Mayor's 
Office

Funded

Initiative 2
Adopt policies to support 
infrastructure adaptation

Use the best available climate science with robust research, 
legislative action, advocacy, and regional coordination to adapt the 
city's infrastructure to be resilient against disruption.

Mayor's 
Office

Budget 
neutral

City capital, 
Federal, State & 
private funding

City operating

277

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative

Supporting Initatives

Lead Agency/
Agencies

Funding 
Status

Funding 
Source(s)

COASTAL DEFENSE

4
 

N
O

I

S

I

V

Initiative 1
Strengthen the city’s coastal 
defenses

Initiative 2
Attract new funds for vital coastal 
protection projects

Complete the City's $3.7 billion coastal protection plan, a program 
of infrastructure investments, natural areas restoration, and design 
and governance upgrades of which nearly half is funded. 

Mayor's 
Office

Partially 
funded*

City capital, 
Federal & 
State funding

Continue to identify and secure new sources of funds for 
infrastructure to reduce coastal flooding risk. 

Mayor's 
Office

Partially 
funded

Federal 
funding

Initiative 3
Adopt policies to support coastal 
protection

Align and adopt policies to support the right investments in coastal 
protection, and ensure those investments are operated and 
maintained effectively. 

Mayor's 
Office

Budget 
neutral

City operating

278

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative

Supporting Initatives

Lead Agency/
Agencies

Funding 
Status

Funding 
Source(s)

Diverse and Inclusive Government

GOVERNMENT WORKFORCE

Initiative 1
Improve the way NYC recruits a 
diverse workforce

Initiative 2 
Improve the way NYC retains a 
diverse workforce

 

 

Initiative 3
Improve the way NYC develops a 
diverse workforce

DCAS

DCAS

DCAS

Budget 
neutral

Budget 
neutral

Budget 
neutral

City operating

City operating

City operating

MINORITY AND WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESS ENTERPRISES

Initiative 1
Increase the number of certified 
M/WBEs

Initiative 2
Increase the rates at which 
agencies utilize those M/WBEs

Initiative 3
Expand legal tools to induce 
greater usage of M/WBEs

 

 

 

PERFORMANCE TRACKING

Initiative 1
Issue an executive order requiring 
regular compilation and use of 
equity metrics

 

Mayor's 
Office

Budget 
neutral

City operating

Mayor's 
Office

Budget 
neutral

City operating

Mayor's 
Office

Budget 
neutral

City operating

Mayor's 
Office

Budget 
neutral

Regulatory/
legislative

T
N
E
M
N
R
E
V
O
G

 

E
V

I

S
U
L
C
N

I

 

D
N
A

 

E
S
R
E
V

I

D

279

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 2011 
Sustainability 
Initiatives

280

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

CREATE CAPACITY FOR NEW HOUSING 

Continue transit-
oriented rezoning

In Progress

The City continues to pursue opportunities for rezonings 
in transit rich neighborhoods. For further updates on this 
initiative, refer to the City’s comprehensive housing plan, 
Housing New York: A Ten-Year, Five-Borough Plan.

Explore additional 
areas for new 
development

In Progress Work is underway on the open space for the first phase of 

New Stapleton Waterfront, anticipated to open to the 
public in the spring of 2016. Advance Phase II open space 
plans for New Stapleton Waterfront by end of 2015. 
Additionally, the City will implement plans for the Staten 
Island Innovation Cluster on the North Shore in 2015. As 
part of NextGen NYCHA, consultation with residents has 
begun regarding new development opportunities on three 
public housing properties located in Brooklyn and the 
Bronx respectively. The City released the RFP for the 
Seward Park RFP in Jan 2013 for the development of nine 
parcels in the Lower East Side. The development, Essex 
Crossing, will include 1,000 housing units, half of which 
will be permanently affordable. The first phase of 
construction is projected to begin in 2015.

Continue to create 
opportunities for denser 
development in transit-
accessible areas, in large 
rezonings including Sunnyside/
Woodside, Bedford-Stuyvesant 
North, West Harlem, West 
Clinton, and East Fordham 
Road 

Continue to apply Inclusionary 
Housing Program in re-zonings 
that encourage substantial new 
housing development

Advance development and 
open space plans for the 
Staten Island North Shore

Explore opportunities for the 
use of underutilized MTA 
properties to create housing, 
economic development, open 
space, or other opportunities to 
enhance surrounding 
communities

Implement improvements in 
Hudson Yards to catalyze 
development

Unlock development potential 
of underutilized Seward Park 
sites

Reduce City government 
leased or owned space by 1.2 
million square feet

Milestone 
Status

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Identify additional potential infill 
opportunities citywide

Partially 
Completed

1

2

3

S
D
O
O
H
R
O
B
H
G

I

E
N

 

D
N
A

 

G
N

I

S
U
O
H

Enable new and 
expanded housing 
models to serve 
evolving population 
needs

In Progress

The City continues to enable new and expanded housing 
models to serve evolving population needs. For further 
updates on this initiative, refer to the City’s 
comprehensive housing plan, Housing New York: A 
Ten-Year, Five-Borough Plan.

Explore regulatory and 
legislative changes to allow the 
creation of safe and legal 
additional units in existing 
housing

FINANCE AND FACILITATE NEW HOUSING

4

Develop new 
neighborhoods on 
underutilized sites

In Progress Construction has commenced for Parcels A and B of 
Hunters Point South, totaling 925 units of affordable 
housing. Design for Willets Point Phase 2 infrastructure 
and waterfront park commenced in August 2014 and is 
expected to be completed by August 2015. More than 
1,190 units in 724 homes have been completed in 
Arverne, Queens. Over 1,000 additional units are 
expected to be completed in 2015. 

Explore new housing models to 
promote smart growth and 
serve smaller households

Completed

Begin construction on 900 units 
of housing in Hunter’s Point 
South, Queens 

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Begin infrastructure 
construction and remediation 
for Willets Point Phase I, a 
mixed-use development 
including 400 housing units

Complete construction on 
1,300 units and begin 
construction on 900 units in 
Arverne, Queens; Complete 
construction on 400 units and 
start construction on 80 units in 
Gateway Brooklyn 

281

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 5

6

S
D
O
O
H
R
O
B
H
G

I

E
N

 

D
N
A

 

G
N

I

S
U
O
H

7

8

9

Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Create new units in 
existing 
neighborhoods

Initiative 
Status

In Progress

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

In total, 3,035 new construction units in the Melrose 
Commons URA have been completed and occupied. 
Since 2004, NYCHA has completed more than 2,730 units 
of affordable housing. For more information related to this 
initiative, refer to the City’s comprehensive housing plan, 
Housing New York: A Ten-Year, Five-Borough Plan.

Develop 20,000 new units by 
2014 under the New Housing 
Marketplace Plan

Complete construction of over 
3,000 units in Melrose 
Commons Urban Renewal Area

Complete construction on 
1,640 units and begin and 
finish construction on 1,800 
affordable units in NYCHA sites

Explore modification of parking 
requirements for affordable 
housing to lower construction 
costs and facilitate housing 
creation

Milestone 
Status

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Develop new housing 
units in existing City 
properties

In Progress Construction and marketing have commenced at 

Artspace PS109 in East Harlem. The City is exploring the 
development of the West 20th St. site as public 
openspace in additional to the continued creation of 
affordable housing in CB 4. For more information related 
to this initiative, refer to the City’s comprehensive housing 
plan, Housing New York: A Ten-Year, Five-Borough Plan.

Start construction of housing 
units in the former PS 109 in E 
Harlem 

Partially 
Completed

ENCOURAGE SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBORHOODS

Completed  This initiative was completed in 2013. The City continues 

to encourage green communities through various 
programs. 

Launch Greener, Greater 
Communities pilot

Completed

In Progress Since July 2014, more than 80 HPD-funded projects 

Foster the creation of 
Greener, Greater 
Communities

Increase the 
sustainability of 
City-financed and 
public housing

Promote walkable 
destinations for retail 
and other services

In Progress

consisting of nearly 200 buildings and over 9,600 dwelling 
units applied for Enterprise Green Communities (EGC) 
certification. Additionally, 13 HPD-funded projects were 
LEED certified. Also in 2014, HPD conducted six Green 
Owners Nights for small and medium sized building 
owners, providing best practices on green energy, water, 
materials, and community issues. In 2014 HPD rolled out 
new “green” standardized specifications for preservation 
projects, incorporating best practices in sustainable 
building material selection into all of the agency’s 
sponsored rehab projects. In April 2015, Mayor de Blasio, 
HUD Secretary Julian Castro and NYCHA announced the 
launch of the largest energy savings program for any public 
housing authority in the country. Through a series of 
competitive Energy Performance Contracts, it is estimated 
that at least $100 million in work will occur across nearly 
300 NYCHA developments to upgrade and retrofit 
thousands of buildings, dramatically reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions and generating tens of millions of dollars in 
cost savings, as well as creating more than 500 jobs.

The City continues to promote neighborhood shopping 
districts. In Staten Island, two additional Race for Space 
businesses opened and a third is expected to open in 
2015. In June 2014, a 14,000 square foot Fine Fare 
supermarket to be located in the Melrose section of the 
Bronx was approved for FRESH benefits. In October 
2014, a FRESH ShopRite supermarket was opened in 
East New York, Brooklyn. At 90,000 square feet, this is the 
largest supermarket in New York City. A FRESH Western 
Beef store located in the Soundview section of the Bronx 
is expected to open in 2015. To date, FRESH benefits 
have incentivized the renovation, expansion, or creation of 
approximately 585,000 square feet of supermarket selling 
area and represent a private investment of over $80 
million in supermarket development for healthy food in 
underserved neighborhoods. The City, through the FRESH 
program, continues to explore challenges and 
opportunities in improving food retail access in the most 
underserved neighborhoods. 

Certify 40 affordable housing 
projects with Enterprise Green 
Communities every year

Partially 
Completed

Promote neighborhood 
shopping districts 

Partially 
Completed

282

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City S
D
O
O
H
R
O
B
H
G

I

E
N

 

D
N
A

 

G
N

I

S
U
O
H

E
C
A
P
S

 

C

I

L
B
U
P

 

D
N
A

 

S
K
R
A
P

Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

10

Preserve and 
upgrade existing 
affordable housing

Milestone 
Status

Completed

Initiative 
Status

In Progress

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Preserve 34,000 affordable 
units by 2014 under the New 
Housing Marketplace Plan

In April 2015, Mayor de Blasio, HUD Secretary Julian 
Castro and NYCHA announced the launch of the largest 
energy savings program for any public housing authority 
in the country. Through a series of competitive Energy 
Performance Contracts, it is estimated that at least $100 
million in work will occur across nearly 300 NYCHA 
developments to upgrade and retrofit thousands of 
buildings, dramatically reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions and generating tens of millions of dollars in 
cost savings, as well as creating more than 500 jobs. For 
more information related to the preservation of 
affordable housing refer to the City’s comprehensive 
housing plan, Housing New York: A Ten-Year, Five-
Borough Plan.

11

Proactively protect 
the quality of 
neighborhoods and 
housing

Completed

This initiative was completed in 2014. For more 
information related to this initiative, refer to the City’s 
comprehensive housing plan, Housing New York: A 
Ten-Year, Five-Borough Plan.

Proactively conduct field 
studies in 1,000 buildings at 
risk for distress or decline 

Completed

TARGET HIGH IMPACT PROJECTS IN NEIGHBORHOODS UNDERSERVED BY PARKS

1

2

Completed

In Progress

Create tools to 
identify parks and 
public space priority 
areas

Open underutilized 
spaces as 
playgrounds or part 
time public spaces

Parks has completed a project to pilot the use of a 
multi-variable matrix based on scorecard information, 
demographic data, environmental factors, physical 
condition and community need and support to identify 
high priority areas. 

To date, 234 schoolyards to playgrounds sites across 
the city have been completed and are open to the 
public. In 2014, DOT held Summer Streets over three 
weekends in August, attracting over 300,000 people. 
The agency is currently planning for Summer Streets 
2015, which will be held the first three Saturdays in 
August. In partnership with community organizations 
throughout the City, 32 Weekend Walks were held. This 
program continues to expand, with Community groups 
planning about 50 Weekend Walks for summer 2015. 
Parks created Play Streets to help combat the 
childhood obesity epidemic in our cities. Play Streets 
allows communities to open up their streets to 
pedestrians for play on a recurrent basis. Thirteen 
Playstreets were conducted in 2014. DOH has assisted 
29 schools with applying for and obtaining Play Streets 
permits. The school permit renews every year with no 
need to reapply. Three new applications have been 
received for schools in 2014. Since 2009, DOH as 
assisted 69 Community Groups with applying for and 
obtaining Play Streets permits. DOT worked with CAU, 
DOH, and SAPO to streamline the Summer Play Streets 
application process, with SAPO playing a coordinating 
role. SAPO permitted 29 Summer Play Streets total in 
2014, including about 50% PAL Play Streets.

Develop matrix assessment 
and mapping tools to assist in 
targeting high priority areas

Completed

Completed

Complete construction and 
open for community use an 
additional 60 schoolyards to 
playgrounds sites bringing the 
total number open for public 
use to 234

Conduct Summer Streets for 
three Saturdays each year

Completed

Conduct Weekend Walks at 20 
locations annually

Completed

Expand the number of schools 
with access to Playstreets by 
40

Partially 
Completed

Conduct 15 Community 
Playstreets each year

Partially 
Completed

283

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

3

Facilitate urban 
agriculture and 
community gardening

E
C
A
P
S

 

C

I

L
B
U
P

 

D
N
A

 

S
K
R
A
P

In Progress A study to identify potential urban agriculture or community 

garden sites on City-owned properties was completed in 
2014. Local Law 48 of 2011 required the New York City 
Department of Citywide Administrative Services (DCAS) to 
create an online, public database of vacant City-owned 
property that includes an assessment of the land’s 
suitability for urban agriculture projects. It also provides 
GreeThumb contact information for those interested in 
gardening on the plot. In the process of developing an 
inventory of usable land, more than 100 properties have 
been identified as potentially suitable for urban agriculture. 
Five vertical farm operators toured NYCEDC’s East NY 
Industrial site in November 2014 and an operator is 
expected to move onto the site in June 2015. Forty-five 
new community gardens were constructed on NYCHA sites 
in 2014, with 70 additional sites projected for 2015. In 
addition, two urban farms have been created on NYCHA 
property, one at Frederick Douglass Houses in the spring of 
2012 on a tennis court and another was created in the 
spring of 2013 as the first “large scale” urban farm on 
NYCHA Property at Red Hook West Houses. DPR has 
established five farmers markets at community garden 
sites. The number of volunteers increased 14 percent from 
2013 to 2014, bringing the total to 14,055. With more than 
14,000 volunteers, the number of community volunteers 
registered with GreenThumb has increased by more than 
25% since 2011. DPR is currently exploring expansion of 
the Building Healthy Communities (BHC) initiative with the 
Mayor’s Fund. The BHC focuses on the 352 gardens 
throughout the Community Parks Initiative zones in 
underserved neighborhoods.

4

Continue to expand 
usable hours at 
existing sites

In Progress Construction of the 19th lighting installation is expected 

to begin in 2015.

Milestone 
Status

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Launch study to identify 
potential urban agriculture or 
community garden sites on 
City-owned properties 
unsuitable for other 
development

Plant 129 new community 
gardens on NYCHA sites

Create one urban farm on a 
NYCHA site

Establish five additional farmers 
markets at community garden 
sites

Increase number of community 
volunteers registered with 
GreenThumb by 25%

Expand support for community 
gardens into new underserved 
neighborhoods 

Partially 
Completed

Register 25 new school 
gardens with Grow to Learn 
NYC per year, and retain at 
least 75% of registered school 
gardens year to year

Reduce impediments to 
agriculture in relevant laws and 
regulations

Completed

Completed

Complete 26 multi-purpose 
fields

Completed

Complete 19 new lighting 
installations

Partially 
Completed

284

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

CREATE DESTINATION-LEVEL SPACES FOR ALL TYPES OF RECREATION 

5

Create and upgrade 
flagship parks 

In Progress Work continues on the Ocean Breeze Park Field House. 

The restoration of bridge and access paths within 
Highland Park is approximately 85% complete, with full 
completeion by July 2015. The third and final section of 
the Highline, from 30th Street to 34th street, was 
completed in 2014. Phase 3 of Fort Washington Park, 
which includes a 1.2-mile greenway to north of the 
George Washington Bridge was opened in June 2014. 
The final phase of construction, which includes pedestrian 
and ADA access, greenway connections, and shore 
stabilization and Dyckman Street is 75% complete and is 
expected to be completed by July 2015. Phase 1 of 
Soundview Park , including the running track, was opened 
to the public in spring 2014. The Rosedale amphitheater 
and Metcalf playground will open in Spring 2015. The 
Metcalf Playground comfort station is still under 
construction and a completion date is pending. Package 
3 of the East River Esplanade was opened to the public in 
April 2014. This portion of the park is located underneath 
the FDR between Pike/Allen and Rutgers Slip; it contains 
active recreational uses including basketball courts, 
petanque courts, and exercise equipment. Phase 1 of 
Governors Island park and public space project was 
opened to the public in May 2014. In addition, 
infrastructure investment is complete, potable water, 
electric, seawall, maritime and historic building 
stabilization projects are complete, on time and 
on-budget. One additional parcel for Bushwick Inlet Park 
was acquired by the City in December 2014 and another 
parcel is expected to be acquired in June 2015. Together, 
these parcels comprise 15.5 acres and include the actual 
inlet at the mouth of Bushwick Creek. In addition, National 
Grid ,who is responsible for remediating a portion of the 
park already owned by DPR, is expected to begin 
remediation of the 50 Kent Site, in Fall 2015. Bush 
Terminal Park opened to the public in November 2014. 

E
C
A
P
S

 

C

I

L
B
U
P

 

D
N
A

 

S
K
R
A
P

Milestone 
Status

Completed

Completed

Highland Park: Complete 
renovations including reservoir 
perimeter lighting, path 
restoration, and new entry 
points

McCarren Park: Complete 
construction of pool and 
year-round recreation center

Ocean Breeze Park: Complete 
2,500-seat field house

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Completed

Highbridge Park: Restore 
bridge and access paths within 
park to improve connectivity 
between Northern Manhattan 
and the Bronx

The High Line: Construct 
Section 2 (20th to 30th streets) 
and pursue acquisition of 
Section 3

Dreier-Offerman Park (Calvert 
Vaux Park): Construct new 
sports fields, lighting, and 
pedestrian paths as part of 
Phase 1 construction

Fort Washington Park: 
Complete phase I construction

Partially 
Completed

Soundview Park: Complete 
construction of Metcalf 
Playground, Rosedale 
Amphitheater, and Metcalf 
Track & Field

Rockaway Park: Complete 
construction of Phase I

Brooklyn Bridge Park: 
Complete Pier 5, re-open 
Empire Fulton Ferry Park and 
Squibb Bridge

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Completed

Transmitter Park: Construct 
1.5-acre site, including a 
playground, benches, and trees

Completed

East River Park Esplanade: 
Substantially complete park 
elements

East River Park: Complete 
reconstruction of seawall and 
esplanade

Governors Island: Commence 
parkland and infrastructure 
development

Hunter’s Point, Queens: 
Complete construction of a 
new five-acre park

Bushwick Inlet Park: Continue 
phased acquisition, 
remediation, and development 
of parks

Completed

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Partially 
Completed

285

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

E
C
A
P
S

 

C

I

L
B
U
P

 

D
N
A

 

S
K
R
A
P

6

7

Convert former 
landfills into public 
space and parkland

In Progress Over 10,000 people visited Freshkills Park in 2014 through 

organized events and tours. Construction of North Park 
and Phase 1 of East Park, comprising an additional 509 
acres in total, are funded. Designs for North Park are 
completed and construction services will be procured in 
2015,. Designs for East Park are expected to be 
completed by June 2016,. Construction services would be 
procured as soon as the design is complete for that area. 
The New Springville Greenway is on schedule at 70% 
completion and is expected to be completed in Summer 
2015.

Increase 
opportunities for 
water-based 
recreation

In Progress DPR continues to pursue funding to complete the 

expansion of launch platform at Hunts Point-Riverside 
Park and for the repair and replacement of floating docks 
at Dyckman Street Marina.

Stapleton, Staten Island: Begin 
construction of six-acre 
waterfront esplanade 

Partially 
Completed

Steeplechase Park: Complete 
construction of Steeplechase 
plaza and restoration of 
carousel

Partially 
Completed

Orchard Beach: Replenish with 
clean sand, and expand the 
South Jetty 

Completed

Long Island City, Queens: 
Complete design and 
reconstruction of pier in the 
Anable Basin

Hudson River Park: Construct 
an upland esplanade in Tribeca 
and reconstruct Pier 97 

Bush Terminal: Complete 
remediation of open space and 
advance Phase l of park

Freshkills Park: Develop the 
first public access areas 
overlooking Main Creek and 
continue capping and closing 
of east and west mounds

Pelham Landfill: Open to the 
public

Ferry Point Park: Complete 
Community Park

Develop multi-agency task 
force to assess opportunities 
for expanding the blue network 
across the city for water-based 
recreation

Complete expansion of launch 
platform at Hunts Point-
Riverside Park

Complete repair and 
replacement of floating docks 
at Dyckman Street Marina

Activate West Harlem Piers 
Park’s excursion boat pier and 
ferry barge

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

286

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

RE-IMAGINE THE PUBLIC REALM

8

Activate the 
streetscape

9

Improve collaboration 
between City, state, 
and federal partners

In Progress Since the inception of the plaza program, DOT has 

initiated 63 plazas projects throughout the city, 43 of 
which are currently open to the public. Ten plaza capital 
projects have been completed, with another two in 
planning, 20 in design, and 12 in construction. Another 33 
plazas have been opened with interim materials. This 
program involves a comprehensive outreach process and 
enjoys broad community support. To date, DOT has 
installed more than 1,250 benches throughout the five 
boroughs, exceeding the 2011 goal by more than 100%. 
The City continues to encourage the revitalization of 
underutilized arcades in Lower Manhattan with new active 
uses including the Water Street POPS 2014 Summer 
Events Programming. A zoning text amendment is 
expected to be referred in 2015. DOT’s The Street Seats 
program enables seasonal public open spaces, generally 
including seating and tables, at locations where sidewalk 
seating is not available. To date, four Street Seats have 
been installed, two in Manhattan and two in Brooklyn. 

In Progress DPR and the Natural Areas Conservancy (NAC) continue 

E
C
A
P
S

 

C

I

L
B
U
P

 

D
N
A

 

S
K
R
A
P

10

Create a network of 
green corridors

In Progress

to advance and pursue projects with other agencies, 
non-profits, and universities to study urban systems. The 
US Forest Service Urban Field Station is currently 
engaged in over 20 joint research projects with various 
other institutions. In addition, the NAC ecological and 
social assessments were completed this fall, painting a 
vivid picture of the social and ecological services provided 
by natural areas in NYC.

In 2014, DPR completed an additional 0.8 lane miles of 
the Soundview Greenway along Lafayette Avenue in 
Soundview Park. DPR also completed three lane miles of 
the Manhattan Waterfront Greenway from 187th Street to 
the northern tip of Manhattan on the West Side. 
Construction began on Randall’s Island Connector and 
ongoing construction on Food Center Drive as part of 
completion of Phase I of South Bronx Greenway. DOT’s 
Greenways program includes the Brooklyn Waterfront 
Greenway, Bronx River and South Bronx Greenways, the 
Manhattan Waterfront Greenway (EDC/DOT/DPR), the 
Jamaica Bay Greenway (DOT/DPR), and the Harlem River 
Greenway. Two Brooklyn Waterfront Greenway capital 
projects will begin construction in 2015: Flushing Avenue 
and West Street. An additional six segments of this 
greenway, which totals six miles, are in design at DDC. 
The Bronx River Greenway was extended to the Bryant 
Avenue Pedestrian Bridge. The Concrete Plant Park and 
Starlight Park are seamlessly linked. Capital projects are 
in development for these segments of the Bronx River 
Greenway. The 2nd edition of the Street Design Manual 
was released in October 2013. DOT has distributed over 
675 copies of the new Manual (including 112 through 
CityStore) and made presentations to all relevant City 
agencies. DOT will continue to update the manual on a 
regular basis. 

Complete construction on 13 
plazas

Completed

Install 500 benches throughout 
the city

Completed

Approve the urbanSHED 
Design Competition winning 
design. Work with City 
agencies, buildings owners, 
contractors and professionals 
on adoption of the new design

Release recommendations to 
further streamline the 
permitting process for sidewalk 
cafes

Amend zoning to facilitate 
revitalization of underutilized 
arcades in Lower Manhattan 
with new active uses

Open four new pop-up cafes 

Conduct five joint research 
projects via the NYC Urban 
Field Station

Completed

Completed

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Align pathways, hours of 
operation, and bicycling rules 
on neighboring park sites

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Continue to build and expand 
greenway waterfront network 
including Brooklyn Waterfront 
Trail, Queens East River Trail, 
Soundview Greenway, South 
Bronx Greenway, Staten Island 
South Shore greenway and 
Manhattan waterfront greenway

Completed

Release update to Streets 
Design Manual that contains 
guidance on landscaping and 
the use of other sustainable 
elements

287

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

PROMOTE AND PROTECT NATURE 

Plant one million 
trees

In Progress As of April 2015, more than 949,000 trees have been 

Plant a total of 695,000 trees

Completed

11

12

13

planted as part of the Million Trees Initiative. DPR 
continues to develop its stewardship program, 
transitioning from planting trees to caring for them. The 
Young Street Tree Pruning project continues with 10,000 
trees pruned in 2014.

Conserve natural 
areas

In Progress

The Natural Areas Conservancy continues to work closely 
with NYC Parks to advance and expand its work in natural 
areas. 

Support ecological 
connectivity 

In Progress DPR is now transitioning from the design and construction 

of greenstreets in the right of way to retrofitting parkland 
to better manage stormwater. DPR has completed design 
for the first stage of restitution/restoration work in 
conjunction with the Belt Parkway Seven Bridges project, 
which includes the planting of thousands of trees and 
anticipates construction to begin in the summer of 2015. 
In 2014, DPR kicked off Phase 2 of that project, between 
Plumb Beach and Rockaway Parkway, with construction 
anticipated to begin in Summer 2016. DPR also began 
design for the Canarsie West Trail Connector in 2014, 
which will include a bike path through Canarsie Park that 
connects to the Jamaica Bay Greenway.

E
C
A
P
S

 

C

I

L
B
U
P

 

D
N
A

 

S
K
R
A
P

ENSURE THE LONG-TERM HEALTH OF PARKS AND PUBLIC SPACE

14

Support and 
encourage 
stewardship

In Progress DPR continues to cultivate stewards, transitioning our 

volunteer days from exclusively planting days to 
stewardship days. The Young Street Tree Pruning project 
continues with 10,000 trees pruned in 2014. In 2014, DPR 
led 85 small scale stewardship workshops throughout the 
year as well as spring and fall stewardship days and 
planting events. 

15

Incorporate 
sustainability through 
the design and 
maintenance of all 
public space

In Progress

The City continues to incorporate sustainability through 
the design and maintenance of all public space when 
practicable. 

Explore methods to ensure 
long-term survival of existing 
urban forest 

Explore the establishment of a 
natural area conservancy to 
preserve the city’s remaining 
wild lands

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Complete 80 greenstreets per 
year

Partially 
Completed

Conduct a study to determine 
best practices for promoting 
biodiversity in green roof 
design and construction 

Partially 
Completed

Restore parkway landscapes to 
improve landscape connectivity

Partially 
Completed

Develop a framework to 
comprehensively address 
landscape issues on building 
sites in City codes and 
regulations

Partially 
Completed

Create green standards for City 
government building site 
development and renovations

Partially 
Completed

Expand access to free tree care 
workshops and tool kits to 
stewardship groups across the 
five boroughs

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Institute DPR’s network 
meetings for at least one park 
in every borough

Increase training activities and 
networking forums at catalyst 
parks

Increase attendance at 
programming to more than 
15,000 across all catalyst parks 
annually

Develop digital library tracking 
system for cataloging 
sustainable aspects of capital 
projects

Develop sustainable design 
checklist to be used with all 
DPR capital projects that 
comply with national 
Sustainable Sites standards

Develop indicators to measure 
existing and new sustainability 
initiatives at DPR related to 
water, material resources, 
energy, fuel, and partnerships

288

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

 

D
N
A

 

S
K
R
A
P

E
C
A
P
S

 

C

I

L
B
U
P

Release first version of the 
Sustainable Parks Plan to 
promote accomplishments, 
train and educate DPR staff in 
best practices, and improve 
sustainability initiatives across 
the agency 

DEVELOP PROGRAMS TO ACCELERATE BROWNFIELD CLEANUP AND REDEVELOPMENT

Milestone 
Status

Completed

Completed OER established the NYC Environmental Review and 

1

2

3

S
D
L
E

I

F
N
W
O
R
B

Increase participation 
in the NYC Voluntary 
Cleanup Program by 
partnering with 
lenders and insurers

In Progress

Increase the capacity 
of small businesses 
and small- and 
mid-size developers 
to conduct 
brownfield cleanup 
and redevelopment

Assessment program to provide comfort letters to 
facilitate land transactions and support more lending on 
brownfields with emphasis in low-income communities. 
OER worked with the environmental insurance industry to 
develop Pollution Liability policies tailored to the needs of 
projects enrolled in the VCP. OER has included financial 
escrow analysis and environmental insurance premiums 
as reimbursable items under the NYC BIG Program.

To increase the capacity of small businesses and 
small- and mid-size developers to conduct brownfield 
cleanup and redevelopment, OER established the Pro 
Bono Environmental Assistance program. This will help 
achieve social equity goals by assisting CBOs, non-profit 
community developers, and small businesses in 
developing cleanup plans in the VCP, and establishing the 
CBO Peer Assistance program to assist CBOs and 
community developers with brownfield land transactions, 
cleanup and site redevelopment. OER is working with the 
NYC Brownfield Partnership to increase industry 
awareness of environmental hardship claims and have 
encouraged legal specialists to join the Pro Bono 
Environmental Assistance program to deliver advice on 
hardship relief.

Enable the 
identification, 
cleanup, and 
redevelopment of 
brownfields

In Progress OER strengthened cleanup standards for waterfront 
industrial properties to achieve social equity goals by 
minimizing environmental impact in environmental justice 
communities associated with severe storm events. OER is 
engaging community and industry experts in Community 
Brownfield Planning Areas, community development 
organizations, and the Brownfields Industry Task Force to 
improve OER programs and get feedback on 
improvements to SPEED, our online environmental 
research engine. OER established the Look Back mode 
and Stand-Still mode for enrollment in the VCP, and 
approved cleanup plans for first projects using each 
mode. OER also launched workshops to train the 
environmental industry to effectively navigate the VCP. 
OER has institutionalized exit interviews with volunteers 
completing cleanup projects in the VCP and have used 
the feedback to improve program delivery. OER is 
currently building the EPIC (Environmental Project 
Information Center) online interface for community 
members and volunteers using the BCP and are targeting 
launch in Fall 2015. OER collaborated on the 
“Streamlining Site Cleanup in NYC” report with EPA to 
illustrate the use of Triad approaches on VCP projects.

Establish programs for financial 
institutions to increase lending 
for properties in the NYC VCP

Establish programs with the 
insurance industry to deliver 
preferred insurance policies for 
properties in the NYC VCP

Completed 

Completed

Completed

Establish a brownfield pro bono 
referral program to provide 
inexperienced developers with 
advice on how to conduct 
investigations and cleanups

Establish flexible NYC BCP 
provisions to allow for land 
preparation for resale

Perform market outreach to 
improve the SPEED real estate 
search engine to promote 
brownfield cleanup and 
redevelopment

Collaborate with community 
development corporations to 
advance the cleanup and 
redevelopment of property 
across the city

Establish a web-based 
application that automates and 
streamlines the navigation of 
City cleanup programs

In partnership with the EPA, 
implement approaches and 
improve Triad tools to 
accelerate property 
investigation and cleanup

Encourage cleanup and 
redevelopment of waterfront 
sites by proposing 
amendments to the Zoning 
Resolution that would allow 
greater flexibility for 
non-residential uses and floor 
area

Completed

Completed

Completed 

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Redirected

289

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

4

Build upon existing 
state and federal 
collaborations to 
improve the City’s 
brownfield programs

Initiative 
Status

Completed

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

Completed

Develop stronger liability 
protection at the state level

The State delegated authority to OER to operate the NYC 
Clean Soil Bank to enable free exchange of clean native 
soil to achieve cost savings and resiliency, and improve 
social equity by advancing affordable housing and 
community projects. OER has established a program to 
unlock abandoned properties in disadvantaged 
neighborhoods through a case-by-case waiver of State 
environmental liens with NYC OMB and NYS Office of the 
State Comptroller, and we are now enabling these sites to 
proceed to auction. OER has extended the Memorandum 
of Agreement between New York State and the City for 
operation of the VCP and delegation of State liability 
protection and petroleum cleanup oversight to OER until 
2016. OER has advocated for legislation to enable full 
statewide liability release for VCP cleanups and has 
advocated for and obtained State legislation that provides 
a waiver of State hazardous waste disposal taxes and 
fees for VCP projects which will greatly lower cost of 
cleanup in the VCP. OER has received recognition from 
EPA that provides comfort on federal environmental 
liability for volunteers using the VCP and enables VCP 
cleanups to qualify for EPA grants, and worked with EPA 
to allow property owners near federal superfund sites to 
acquire federal liability protection for cleanup and 
redevelopment.

Develop stronger liability 
protection at the federal level

Completed

Develop a pilot program for 
environmental lien forgiveness

Completed

STRENGTHEN INCENTIVES FOR BROWNFIELD CLEANUP AND REDEVELOPMENT 

S
D
L
E

I

F
N
W
O
R
B

5

6

Study the economic 
value of brownfield 
redevelopment in 
New York City

Leverage the NYC 
Voluntary Cleanup 
Program to establish 
funding and other 
incentives for 
cleanup and 
redevelopment

Assess the fiscal and 
employment benefits of 
brownfield redevelopment in 
New York City

Completed

Develop programs that align 
incentives for neighborhood 
housing or infrastructure 
revitalization with brownfield 
incentives

Establish brownfield 
redevelopment financial 
counseling program

Completed

Completed

Develop a web-based, 
brownfield financial assistance 
search tool

Completed 

Completed OER is pursuing unique research that will evaluate the 
social and environmental justice benefits of brownfield 
cleanup and redevelopment in the VCP in low-income and 
disadvantaged communities in NYC. OER has completed 
the financial analysis of the first three years of over 260 
cleanup projects to assess the amount of affordable 
housing that will be created (3,850 new units), job creation 
(4,500 permanent new jobs and 19,500 construction jobs), 
leveraging of private investment ($8.4 billion in new 
investment). 

Completed OER established a series of programs to achieve social 
equity goals including the Affordable Housing Cleanup 
Fund using EPA grants to support cleanup of affordable 
housing projects in the VCP. OER established Preferred 
Community Development Grants to prioritize City funding 
for cleanup of affordable housing, community facilities, 
and community-supported projects. OER established the 
NYC Green Property Certification program to encourage 
more developers to work with government on cleanups to 
ensure that disadvantaged communities with a 
disproportionate number of brownfields are better 
protected from environmental pollution. We received 
$500,000 from the NYS Regional Economic Development 
Council to fund cleanup of VCP projects to promote 
affordable housing and economic development in 
disadvantaged communities. OER launched the 
Brownfield Certification program in collaboration with 
NYS DEC to enable small businesses and community 
development corporations to claim Federal IRS tax 
deductions for brownfield cleanup costs incurred under 
the VCP, and OER is advocating in Congress for 
reauthorization of these deductions which expired in 
2011. OER’s pre-application meetings include discussions 
of available financial and technical assistance tailored 
toward redevelopment of individual projects. Additionally, 
OER will launch the Financial Assistance Search Tool 
(FAST) to help CBOs, community developers, and others 
find available grants in our Brownfield Incentive Grant 
(BIG) program. 

290

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

DEEPEN OUR COMMITMENT TO COMMUNITIES FOR COMMUNITY BROWNFIELD  
PLANNING, EDUCATION, AND SERVICE

7

Support community-
led planning efforts

S
D
L
E

I

F
N
W
O
R
B

8

9

Support local and 
area-wide community 
brownfield planning 
efforts

Increase the 
transparency and 
accessibility of 
brownfield cleanup 
plans

In Progress OER has designated 19 place-based Community Brownfield 
Planning Areas and has established nine additional areas for 
designation under this plan. Future plans are to continue to 
expand into new neighborhoods. This will expand the reach of 
OER community assistance programs, including eligibility for 
up to $50,000 in OER grant funding to CBOs for grass-roots 
community brownfield planning. OER functions as an 
ombudsman for CBOs trying to work with City agencies to 
help them achieve local community planning goals. OER is 
providing special attention, benefits, and resources to 
brownfield sites in the East New York Community Brownfield 
Planning Area. OER has extended funding for OER grants to 
support community brownfield planning through 2015. OER 
has established the CBO Peer Assistance Program and 
selected an experienced CBO (SoBro) to perform brownfield 
financial and real estate peer counseling and assistance for 
other CBOs with less experience on brownfield 
redevelopment, and are developing a brownfield management 
reference manual for CBOs that provides best management 
practices. OER has advocated for reforms to BOA designation 
and for continued State funding of the BOA community 
planning grant program. 

In Progress OER has established a program to build capacity of CBOs 
and other community brownfield planners by sharing best 
management practices for brownfield planning, assisting 
CBOs in working with city agencies, and helping them 
navigate the VCP. OER has acquired HUD funding to 
complete our online community planning portal to help 
CBOs achieve their revitalization goals. Working with NYS 
Department of State, OER is encouraging development of 
new community brownfield planning areas in regions of 
New York City heavily impacted by Superstorm Sandy and 
are involved, in cross-government collaboration with NY 
State, in the NY Rising program and Regional Economic 
Development Council to promote community resiliency 
planning.

Completed OER has developed a wide variety of programs to promote 
transparency including provisions for New York City’s three 
library systems to assist patrons with online access to VCP 
project information and OER educational information. OER 
established an online repository of documents for all 
projects in the VCP. A public contact list is developed for 
each VCP project, and OER publishes three fact sheets for 
release to these contacts at each stage of cleanup. A 
Community Protection Statement is developed for each 
cleanup project in the VCP and is written in six languages to 
promote wider dissemination of plans for community 
protection. OER established the BrownfieldWorks! program 
to place workforce development graduates on cleanup 
projects in the VCP. OER expanded our grant program to 
fund salaries for BrownfieldWORKS! trainees and launched 
a professional mentorship program by OER staff to assist 
trainees in getting full time jobs. OER produced four 
educational videos and posted them on OER’s website to 
inform communities of the importance of community 
engagement on brownfields to address environmental 
injustice and about OER programs for investigation and 
cleanup. OER recently produced a new video on the 
meaning and value of certification of properties under the 
NYC Green Property Certification Program and will release 
that under this plan.

Establish 25 NYC Place-Based 
Community Brownfield Planning 
Areas

Completed

Provide focused City assistance 
and services to designated 
CBPDs for brownfield and 
sustainability planning

Completed

Completed

Pilot incorporation of brownfield 
planning into early stages of 
redevelopment planning with 
East New York Sustainable 
Communities project

Completed

Completed

Completed

Identify 8-12 new Place-Based 
Community Brownfield Planning 
Areas in neighborhoods 
disproportionally impacted by 
clusters of brownfields

Conduct a study to identify best 
management practices for 
community planners undertaking 
community brownfield planning 
efforts

Establish training and other 
programs to build the capacity of 
community-based organizations 
in brownfield redevelopment, 
planning, and implementation

Develop online community 
planning portal to provide 
cutting edge tools to community 
brownfield planners

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Support pilot program 
established by New York State 
Department of State for 
area-wide community brownfield 
planning and cross-government 
collaboration

Establish an online document 
repository for VCP project 
information

Completed

Establish advanced methods for 
the communication of brownfield 
project information to New York 
City communities

Develop web-based educational 
tools to help all stakeholders 
understand brownfield cleanup 
and redevelopment processes

Completed

Completed 

Expand the NYC 
BrownfieldWORKS! training 
program

Completed 

291

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

EXPAND THE USE OF GREEN REMEDIATION

10

Promote green 
remediation in the 
NYC Brownfield 
Cleanup Program

S
D
L
E

I

F
N
W
O
R
B

11

Promote green space 
on remediated 
brownfield properties

Establish the Sustainability 
Statement in all cleanup plans

Completed

Accelerate adoption of green 
remediation practices by 
establishing a program for 
green remediation audits of 
cleanup plans under the VCP

Encourage the use of recycled 
concrete aggregate (RCA) as 
substitute for conventional 
backfill material

Develop tree-based 
phytoremediation approach for 
end-of-cleanup polishing, also 
promoting the MillionTreesNYC 
program

Establish green remediation 
storm water management 
approaches on remedial sites 
and expand green 
infrastructure implementation 
as part of redevelopment

Create three Pocket Parks in 
collaboration with community 
planning organizations

Create design for state-of-the-
art community gardens on 
remediated brownfields

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed 

Completed

Completed

Completed OER was delegated the authority by NY State to establish 

the NYC Clean Soil Bank to promote recycling of clean 
soil from VCP redevelopments. The Clean Soil Bank 
promotes social equity and economic development goals 
including cost-free reuse on affordable housing projects, 
wetland restoration, climate change resiliency projects 
and City capital construction projects. OER established 
Climate Resiliency and Green Remediation Surveys that 
are performed free of charge to ensure that cleanup and 
redevelopment projects in the VCP are prepared for the 
impacts of climate change and will minimize future 
community environmental impact during severe storm 
events. OER established a Sustainability Statement in all 
cleanup plans and a Sustainability Report in all final 
cleanup reports to promote green remediation and 
development. Recycled concrete aggregate is now reused 
for backfill on many VCP projects. Hundreds of new trees 
have been planted as part of final development on VCP 
projects approved in the first three years of operation to 
support Million Trees and also provide groundwater 
quality polishing. High efficiency stormwater management 
techniques and green infrastructure education are 
provided by Climate Resiliency and Green Remediation 
Surveys performed by OER for projects in the VCP.

Completed OER has completed environmental investigations that 

enable the creation of parks in underserved 
neighborhoods in Staten Island and Brooklyn. Cleanup 
was performed by OER using federal funds to enable 
creation of a park at Mariners Marsh on Staten Island. The 
NYC Clean Soil Bank was used to provide free soil for 
shaping of park space at Fresh Kills Park and numerous 
brownfield cleanups are in progress or completed on 
coastal parkland. OER has established conceptual plans 
for raised-bed community garden space suitable for use 
on brownfield sites. OER has established the NYC Clean 
Soil Bank and are working with CBOs to provide clean soil 
free of charge for backfill for affordable housing and other 
social equity uses. We have established OER funded 
grants to fund investigation and cleanup of properties to 
enable community uses.

CONTINUE IMPLEMENTING GREY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES

1

2

S
Y
A
W
R
E
T
A
W

Completed 

Upgrade wastewater 
treatment plants to 
achieve secondary 
treatment standards

In May 2011, the City certified that Newtown Creek 
Wastewater Treatment Plant meets federal Clean Water 
Act (CWA) standards for secondary treatment two years 
ahead of schedule. All 14 of the City’s wastewater 
treatment plants now meet CWA secondary treatment 
standards. 

Certify that the Newtown Creek 
WWTP meets secondary 
treatment standards

Completed

Upgrade treatment 
plants to reduce 
nitrogen discharges

Completed 

In 2013, DEP completed a $237 million upgrade to the 
Wards Island Wastewater Treatment Plant that reduced 
the amount of nitrogen discharged from the plant by 
nearly 50 percent. DEP has completed the construction at 
the Tallman Island Wastewater Treatment Plant as of May 
1, 2014. The remaining plant upgrades and stabilization 
work at the Bowery Bay, Wards Island, and Tallman Island 
Plants, as well as at the 26th Ward and Jamaica Plants, 
are projected to be complete in February 2016.

Complete upgrades at the 
Wards Island WWTP

Complete upgrades at the 
Tallman Island WWTP

Complete upgrades at the 
Bowery Bay WWTP

Completed

Completed

Completed

292

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

Completed

Completed

Complete Paerdegat Basin 
CSO Facility

Complete Alley Creek CSO 
Facility

Complete Avenue V Pumping 
Station

Completed

Complete upgrades to the 
Gowanus Canal Pumping 
Station

Complete upgrades to the 
Gowanus Canal Flushing 
Tunnel

Construct an aeration system 
for Lower English Kills in 
Newtown Creek

Completed

Completed

Completed

Complete a destratification 
facility at Shellbank Creek

Completed

Completed over 60 miles of 
new or reconstructed sewers 
from FY08 to FY12

Completed

Continue to inspect each tide 
gate once per month as per 
standard operating procedure. 

Completed

Clean 138 miles of interceptor 
sewers

Completed

3

4

5

S
Y
A
W
R
E
T
A
W

Complete 
cost-effective grey 
infrastructure 
projects to reduce 
CSOs and improve 
water quality

Completed  DEP has completed the shotcreting of an old brick sewer 
as of April 2014. The Avenue V Pumping Station has been 
operating at the new wet weather capacity of 80 MGD as 
of October 2014. DEP placed the Gowanus Flushing 
Tunnel in full operation as of April 23, 2014 with a 10-day 
test to verify the system was working correctly, completed 
on May 3, 2014. The Gowanus Pumping Station has been 
placed into operation with the CSO Screening System as 
of November 22, 2014 and fully tested as of December 
24, 2014. The Flushing Tunnel System and the Pumping 
Station System has been placed into full operation. 
Substantial completion for Lower English Kills aeration 
was issued March 31, 2014.

Expand the sewer 
network

In Progress

Optimize the existing 
sewer system

Completed 

In 2013, DEP and DDC completed design and bid projects 
in the Twin Ponds Area, Sheldon Avenue Area, and Richard 
Avenue area. These projects will install new sanitary and 
sewer storm infrastructure areas and the Twin Ponds 
projects will have Bluebelt components. In 2013, the City 
also initiated a program to advance sewer construction 
where possible to alleviate flooding in targeted areas 
affected by repeat events. Two accelerated construction 
projects were completed in late 2013, with studies 
underway for similar projects in southeast Queens.

In 2010, DEP implemented more efficient work practices 
and used in-house staff to expand our sewer cleaning 
operations. In 2011, the City finished inspecting all 138 
miles of interceptor sewers and in 2012, DEP completed 
the first two-year cycle of interceptor cleaning. In total, DEP 
removed 30 million gallons of material, freeing up storage 
capacity of 3.06 million gallons. Collectively, this translates 
into a reduction of combined sewer overflows of 100 
million gallons per year. In addition, in 2012, DEP inspected 
the remaining 219 tide gates and repaired or replaced 
those deemed necessary. Reported sewer backups 
continue to decline. In 2013, DEP cleaned more than 760 
miles of sewers and continues to expand several programs 
to address sewer backups, including programmatic 
degreasing and improved sewer backup response 
practices. In addition, DEP expanded the pilot to evaluate 
sewer manhole sensors and installed additional devices for 
a total of 64 throughout the city. These sensors measure 
the elevation of wastewater in the sewer and wirelessly 
transmit that information to DEP’s computer systems, 
allowing DEP to dispatch crews promptly and fix the 
problem before it results in a sewer backup. In November, 
the City released the second annual State of the Sewers, 
which includes key performance indicators for sewer 
maintenance and construction for each borough.

USE GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE TO MANAGE STORMWATER

6

Expand the Bluebelt 
program

In Progress

Expand Bluebelt system into 
Queens

Completed

In 2013 DEP continued to develop the Springfield 
Gardens Bluebelt in southeast Queens and accomplished 
a critical milestone for the Mid-Island Bluebelt by 
completing the Final Generic Environmental Impact 
Statement. The first capital project in the Mid-Island 
Bluebelt is scheduled to start construction in Fall 2014 
and will involve the restoration of New Creek’s west 
branch. In addition, the City has advanced a second 
Mid-Island Bluebelt project called Last Chance Pond, 
estimated at approximately $35 million.

293

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

7

8

9

S
Y
A
W
R
E
T
A
W

Build public green 
infrastructure 
projects

Engage and enlist 
community 
stakeholders in 
sustainable storm 
water management

In Progress By the end of 2014, DEP and the Departments of Parks 

and Recreation, Design and Construction and the 
Economic Development Corporation had initiated 
construction on multiple area-wide contracts covering 
approximately 27,000 acres of the City. DEP is currently in 
construction or in final design phase on approximately 
2,000 bioswales and stormwater greenstreets. 

Completed  By 2015, DEP committed over $13 million to 33 grantees 
through the Green Infrastructure Grant Program. In 2014, 
DEP also conducted a targeted outreach campaign to 
property owners that would be eligible for the Grant 
Program, and accepted applications in both the spring 
and the fall. In addition, DEP investigated a pilot a 
mini-grant program for homes and small properties. DEP 
continued to meet with the Water Infrastructure Steering 
Committee (formerly the Green Infrastructure Steering 
Committee) on a range of stormwater management and 
water quality issues, including resiliency and the Long 
Term Control Plan process. DEP also continued to engage 
with a broad range of stakeholders including 
neighborhood associations, community boards, elected 
officials, schools and environmental organizations.

28 GI sites have been 
completed, with an additional 5 
substantially completed. 

Partially 
Completed

Capture the first inch of runoff 
from 70 additional acres of 
impervious surface

Partially 
Completed

Implement a green 
infrastructure grant program

Completed

Seek input through the Green 
Infrastructure Citizens Group

Completed

Modify codes to 
increase the capture 
of storm water

In Progress

Throughout 2014, the City continued to track compliance 
with the 2012 stormwater performance standard (or 
“stormwater rule”) for new development and significant 
redevelopment. Compliance is tracked through house 
connection and sewer connection proposals received by 
DEP. In 2014 the City adjusted its reporting methods to 
more accurately track compliance and eliminate 
redundancy. Since the stormwater rule for new 
development and significant redevelopment took effect in 
2012, approximately 260 sites were required to comply. 
Planned source control technologies on those sites 
include 100 blue roofs, 160 tanks, 11 drywells, and 8 
perforated pipe systems. Of these, approximately 60 
connections have been constructed; this includes 27 blue 
roofs, 29 tanks, 3 drywells, and 1 perforated pipe system. 
Pursuant to LL80 of 2013, DEP and DOT are planning to 
pilot porous paving materials in the roadway and on city 
sidewalks. Monitoring will be conducted and a final report 
will be submitted to city council in 2016. DEP collaborated 
with DCP on the Open Industrial Uses Study to suggest 
appropriate stormwater controls for open industrial sites.

Require greater on-site 
detention and infiltration for 
new development and 
redevelopment

Require greater storm water 
runoff controls from 
construction sites

Study potential code changes 
to incorporate blue roofs on 
existing buildings

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Develop new design standards 
for sidewalks

Partially 
Completed

Study improved regulation of 
open industrial uses to reduce 
runoff

Completed

10

Provide incentives for 
green infrastructure

Evaluate the feasibility of using 
price signals to reduce storm 
water runoff

Completed

Evaluate the efficacy of the 
green roof tax abatement

Completed

Completed  First initiated in 2011, DEP’s Parking Lot Stormwater Pilot 

Program generates revenue for operation and 
maintenance of the City’s wastewater system. The 
program applies a stormwater discharge fee to 
stand-alone parking lots that contribute runoff to the 
City’s wastewater system, but that do not receive City 
water service. DEP’s stormwater charge increased from 
$0.06 per square foot in 2013 to $0.063 in 2014, to 
account for rate structure increases. In 2014, DEP billed 
557 accounts for $501,882.68. Parking lot owners who 
implement green infrastructure practices are exempt from 
the stormwater discharge fee. The Green Roof Tax 
Abatement program was fully in place and available to 
property owners for only three to four months of 2014, 
therefore DEP will gather another year of data to 
determine the efficacy of the program. There were no 
applications for the green roof tax abatement in 2014. 

294

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

REMOVE INDUSTRIAL POLLUTION FROM WATERWAYS

11

Actively participate in 
waterway clean-up 
efforts

In Progress

The City worked with other responsible parties throughout 
2014 to ensure that the implementation of the selected 
remedy addresses contamination results in a clean and 
safe waterway, and incorporates principles of social 
justice. In 2014, the City conducted sampling of 
groundwater and point sources in Newtown Creek, 
including stormwater and CSOs, providing more data to 
support the Superfund investigation. In 2014, the DEP 
Gowanus Canal maintenance dredging project was 
superseded by the National Grid dredge of the entire 
canal. Application to dredge CSO mounds in Flushing 
Creek were prepared for submittal. Completion of 
dredging in Paerdegat Basin certified by DEP on Nov. 18, 
2014 and approved by DEC on Dec. 1, 2014. Completion 
of dredging in Hendrix Creek certified by DEP on October 
17, 2011 and approved by DEC on May 3, 2012.

Participate in the Superfund 
investigation and feasibility 
study in the Gowanus Canal

Partially 
Completed

Participate in the Superfund 
investigation in Newtown Creek

Partially 
Completed

Submit application to dredge 
CSO mounds for Gowanus 
Canal and Flushing Creek

Begin CSO dredging in 
Paerdegat Basin

Completed

Completed

Complete dredging in Hendrix 
Creek

Completed

PROTECT AND RESTORE WETLANDS, AQUATIC SYSTEMS, AND ECOLOGICAL HABITAT

12

Enhance wetlands 
protection

In Progress

In 2014, the City continued to develop wetland resources, 
including the one foot Digital Elevation Model (DEM) of 
wetland areas, which has been completed. This 
information will be used in discussions with state and 
federal partners to potentially update existing wetland 
maps and the methodology to produce them. The City is 
also working with federal and state partners through the 
USACE’s Rockaway Reformulation in Jamaica Bay and 
the NY Rising Program, which are currently evaluating 
proposals that will help protect existing infrastructure and 
increase the resiliency of coastal ecosystems.

Transfer at least five 
City-owned wetlands to DPR

Work with state and federal 
partners to update wetlands 
maps

Modify the Waterfront 
Revitalization Program to 
designate additional sites of 
ecological importance

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

S
Y
A
W
R
E
T
A
W

13

Restore and create 
wetlands

In Progress Major construction in the Paerdegat Basin was completed 

in December 2013, and the project has moved into the 
monitoring and maintenance phase. Restoration 
construction of Pugsley Creek Park was completed in 
summer 2013; restoration construction of Soundview Park 
was completed in fall 2013. Bronx River fish passage 
construction was completed at River Park, at the 182nd 
Street Dam, to allow upstream access for spawning for 
river herring. The fish passage will be open when the first 
migration season begins in spring 2015. The USACE has 
re-started site evaluations and is continuing discussions 
with local agency partners in the development of 
restoration concepts for sites identified in the 2008 Bronx 
River Ecosystems Feasibility Study. Construction 
documents for Randall’s Island shoreline restoration are 
nearing completion. Presentation to Public Design 
Commission is expected in January 2015 and 
construction is expected to begin in 2015. Restoration 
construction of Dreier Offerman Park was completed in 
summer 2013. Meadow Lake restoration contract has 
been bid and awarded and is expected to begin 
construction in 2015. Freshkills North Park restoration 
construction was completed in summer 2013. DPR is 
undertaking the Spring Creek and Sunset Cove projects, 
which together total over $15 million. The projects will 
restore marshland and upland forest to improve the bay’s 
ecological function and resiliency to coastal storms as 
well as create new recreational opportunities. DEP has 
already invested $8 million to complete the restoration of 
Yellow Bar, Black Wall and Rulers Bar, with an additional 
$7 million expected to be allocated based on 
recommendations in the USACE Jamaica Bay 
Reformulation Study due in April 2016.

Evaluate the vulnerability of salt 
marshes through additional 
monitoring

Partially 
Completed

Develop a comprehensive 
strategy for wetlands

Complete Paerdegat Basin 
restoration

Completed

Completed

Complete Pugsley Creek Park 
restoration

Completed 

Complete Soundview Park 
restoration

Completed 

Complete Bronx River 
restoration - all phases

Complete Randall’s Island 
shoreline restoration

Complete Dreier Offerman Park 
restoration

Complete Meadow Lake 
restoration

Complete Freshkills North Park 
restoration construction by 
2013 summer

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Invest $15 million in wetlands 
restoration in Jamaica Bay

Partially 
Completed

295

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

14

Improve wetlands 
mitigation

In Progress

The City, led by the NYCEDC, received approval on the 
mitigation bank prospectus. Two drafts of the Mitigation 
Banking Instrument (MBI) have been submitted to the 
Interagency Review Team. A final signed MBI is expected 
in February or March of 2015. The Public Comment 
periods opened for Army Corps in-water construction 
permits as well as the Community Development Block 
Grant Program - Disaster Recovery action plan 
amendment allocation. 

Establish a wetland mitigation 
banking or in-lieu fee program

Partially 
Completed

15

Improve habitat for 
aquatic species

In Progress DEP and DPR have worked with Baykeeper, the Harbor 
School, Hudson River Foundation and other partners to 
add spat on shell to the existing reef at Soundview Park 
to expand it, and monitoring continued to evaluate its 
effect. DPR is also designing a restoration project at 
Sunset Cove in Jamaica Bay that will incorporate a pilot 
oyster reef restoration project. In 2014, the City continued 
to leverage grant funds to support aquatic habitat 
improvement projects. DEP was awarded a $1 million 
grant from the Department of Interior to expand the oyster 
restoration efforts at the Head of Bay - Jamaica Bay. The 
City is contributing an additional $375,000 to the project, 
bringing the total to $1.375 million. Design will begin in 
spring 2015 with expected construction to start in fall 
2015. The oyster restoration project is being carried out in 
partnership with Cornell Cooperative Extension, Hudson 
River Foundation, and the New York Harbor School.

Expand oyster pilot project and 
conduct additional research

Partially 
Completed

Develop a strategy to advance 
restoration efforts 

Partially 
Completed

Complete ribbed mussel bed 
pilot

Completed

Complete eel grass pilot

Completed

ENSURE THE QUALITY OF OUR DRINKING WATER

Y
L
P
P
U
S

 

R
E
T
A
W

1

2

3

4

Continue the 
Watershed Protection 
Program

In Progress New York State Department of Health released the final 

version of the Revised 2007 Filtration Avoidance 
Determination (FAD) on May 7, 2014. DEP continues to 
implement the watershed protection program including 
the land acquisition program. 

Protect the water 
supply from 
hydrofracking for 
natural gas

Complete the 
Catskill/Delaware 
Ultraviolet (UV) 
Disinfection Facility

Complete the Croton 
Water Filtration Plant

Completed  On December 17, 2014, Governor Cuomo announced his 

intention to prohibit natural gas extraction using 
high-volume hydrofracking in New York State.

Completed 

In October 2013, DEP announced the completion of the 
Catskill/Delaware Ultraviolet Treatment Facility. The $1.5 
billion Catskill/Delaware UV Facility will provide an added 
layer of protection against pathogens and other harmful 
microorganisms for the drinking water consumed by more 
than 9 million residents of New York City and portions of 
Westchester County. 

Maintain the city’s Filtration 
Avoidance Determination (FAD)

Partially 
Completed

Seek to acquire land by 
contacting the owners of at 
least 50,000 acres of land every 
year

Work with the State to secure 
the prohibition of hydrofracking 
within the city’s watersheds

Completed

Completed

Complete construction

Completed

In Progress Construction of the above grade structures continues. 

Complete construction

Startup and testing of both Plants A & B continued. 
Modifications of Valve Loops in Plants A & B were 
completed. The City is on schedule to begin full 
operations no later than 2015. 

Partially 
Completed

MAINTAIN AND ENHANCE THE INFRASTRUCTURE THAT DELIVERS WATER TO NEW YORK CITY 

5

Repair the Delaware 
Aqueduct

In Progress Design of the bypass tunnel and Wawarsing repairs was 

completed in late 2014 and public bidding for 
construction commenced in January 2015. The bypass 
tunnel contract was bid on March 27, 2015. This contract 
is expected to be awarded in May 2015 and registered in 
July 2015. The project continues to be on schedule and 
on budget. The New Croton Aqueduct was completed on 
June 30,2013. The Jamaica groundwater system design 
has been decides into four groups. The first three groups 
have passed through facility planning, and the Basis of 
Design Reports are approved. Design will progress to 30 
percent compete for the last group by the end of 2015. 

Break ground on the aqueduct 
bypass

Partially 
Completed

Complete upgrades to the 
Cross River Pumping Station

Complete design for the 
upgrades to the Croton Falls 
Pumping Station

Completed

Completed

Complete rehabilitation of the 
New Croton Aqueduct

Completed

Begin design for the upgrades 
to the Jamaica groundwater 
system

Partially 
Completed

296

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Connect the 
Delaware and Catskill 
Aqueducts

In Progress By late March 2014, all seven holes were cored into the 

Start construction

Milestone 
Status

Partially 
Completed

6

7

8

Y
L
P
P
U
S

 

R
E
T
A
W

Pressurize the 
Catskill Aqueduct

In Progress

Maintain and 
upgrade dams

In Progress

Catskill Aqueduct. Meetings have been held with the DEP 
and design consultant in regards to start-up and flow 
testing for the development of standard operating 
protocols and procedures. Substantial completion is 
anticipated on, or about, June 30, 2015 with a final 
completion date, on, or about, June 29, 2016.

 In 2014, DEP refined project objectives and reached 
consensus on capacity requirements supporting release 
of a final Facility Plan in February 2015 that identifies the 
need for a secondary pressure tunnel between Kensico 
and Eastview. The project will commence a Basis of 
Design effort during 2015, with active design to 
commence in 2016. Construction is anticipated to 
commence in 2019.

The reconstruction of Gilboa Dam is 95% complete. 
Design for the new low level outlet and Schoharie Release 
Chamber was completed and the pre-bid meeting was 
recently held and construction is anticipated to 
commence in 2015. All engineering assessments as 
required by NYS were completed. Engineering studies are 
underway for the rehabilitation of the Ashokan Reservoir 
dam and dikes, which is phase one of the reconstruction 
of the New Croton Dam began in July 2013 and is 
expected to be substantially completed in July 2016. This 
work includes the mechanical replacement and other 
structural repair to the outlet works. 

MODERNIZE IN-CITY DISTRIBUTION

9

10

Complete City Water 
Tunnel No. 3

In Progress

Build a backup 
tunnel to Staten 
Island

In Progress

In October 2013, the City announced the activation of the 
Manhattan portion of Stage 2 of City Tunnel No. 3. The 
Brooklyn-Queens section is scheduled for completion in 
2018.

In 2012, in partnership with the Port Authority of New York 
and New Jersey and the New York City Economic 
Development Corporation, DEP launched tunneling 
operations for construction of the Staten Island Siphon. 
During Hurricane Sandy, the Staten Island shaft site was 
inundated with water and the tunnel boring machine was 
damaged, delaying the project for approximately one year. 
The tunnel boring machine has been refurbished from the 
flooding, and tunneling operations and resumed in April 
2014. 

11

Upgrade water main 
infrastructure

In Progress DEP initiated construction in Coney Island and continues 

to make substantial progress on key water supply 
projects in targeted areas, such as the Rockaways. Some 
major improvements were also made citywide. Completed 
projects include a trunk water main replacement in 
Atlantic Avenue, Brooklyn, valued at $14.5 million and a 
trunk water main project on E59th Street, Manhattan 
Community Boards 6 and 8, valued at $33.5 million. This 
project was a key component in the activation of City 
Water Tunnel No. 3, connecting Shaft 31B to the 
distribution network. Finally, DEP invested over $30 
million in three distribution water main projects in Queens, 
improving water quality and distribution in Community 
Boards 4, 6, 8, 9 and 13.

Complete Facility Planning and 
Basis of Design Report

Partially 
Completed

Begin rehabilitation of the 
Gilboa Dam

Completed

Begin engineering assessments 
for dams as required by the 
State

Partially 
Completed

Activate Stage 2 in Manhattan

Completed

Begin construction

Partially 
Completed

Replace 80 miles of water 
mains

Completed

297

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

Y
L
P
P
U
S

 

R
E
T
A
W

N
O

I

T
A
T
R
O
P
S
N
A
R
T

IMPROVE THE EFFICENCY OF THE WATER SUPPLY

12

Increase operational 
efficiency with new 
technology

Completed  As of January 2015, the City has installed Automated 
Meter Reading (AMR) devices for over 97 percent of 
customers. In February 2012, the City expanded the Leak 
Notification Program to proactively notify large building 
owners of potential leaks and enable owners and 
managers to quickly respond and fix leaks before they 
become a costly problem. Since starting the program in 
March 2011, more than 72,000 customers have saved an 
estimated $60 million in otherwise wasted water or 
damaging leaks. Since January 2012, DEP staff have 
replaced over 19,000 underperforming meters.

13

Increase water 
conservation

In Progress

In 2014, the City officially released the Water Demand 
Management Plan, launched the Municipal Water 
Efficiency Program, and completed conservation retrofits 
in 60 schools, 12 fire houses, and over 150 spray 
showers. The overall program will target municipal 
buildings for water savings of nine million gallons per day 
and cost $60 million by 2019. The City completed analysis 
of costs and benefits of widespread replacements of 
inefficient toilets and developed a strategy to achieve an 
optimal flow. The City launched the Toilet Replacement 
Program in August of 2014 to replace approximately 
200,000 fixtures in its first Phase. On August 8, 2012, the 
Local Law 41 of 2012, the Plumbing Code Revisions Bill 
(Intro 807A) was signed into law. The new law 
incorporates greywater reuse standards into NYC 
Plumbing Code by bringing it up to date with the 2009 
edition of the International Plumbing Code and making 
amendments to the Code that reflect the unique character 
and needs of the City. DEP is in the process of developing 
a guidance document outlining various processes and 
making the plumbing code requirements more accessible. 

Complete the installation of 
AMR devices citywide

Completed

Replace 10,000 large water 
meters

Completed

Optimize delivery by integrating 
forecasting models into 
operations

Completed

Release a design manual for 
water conservation in buildings

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Pilot advanced strategies for 
water conservation in City 
buildings

Launch a process to replace all 
old, inefficient toilets in City 
Buildings

Analyze the costs and benefits 
of widespread replacements of 
inefficient toilets and develop a 
strategy to achieve an optimal 
flow

Develop comprehensive 
greywater reuse standards

Partially 
Completed

IMPROVE AND EXPAND SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE AND OPTIONS

1

Improve and expand 
bus service 
throughout the city

In Progress

The following SBS corridors have been launched: 
Nostrand Avenue (Nov 2013), LaGuardia (May 2014), 34th 
Street (Nov 2011) and Hylan Blvd (Sept 2012). Additional 
enhancements will be completed to the Williamsburg 
Bridge plaza stop on the Nostrand Ave. Corridor in 2015. 
Design for the Woodhaven Blvd. Corridor is underway. 
The Corridor is expected to launch after capital 
reconstruction in 2017. In the interim, initial bus priority 
improvements will be installed on the Corridor in the 
summer of 2015.Transit Signal Priority has been installed 
on three corridors and design is underway for an 
additional eight corridors. It is expected that all 11 
corridors will be active by summer 2016, with additional 
corridors will follow in the future. The MTA has installed 
Bus Time real time information on every route in New York 
City. Improvements to bus access to the Ed Koch 
Queensboro Bridge were completed in 2011. 

Launch Nostrand Ave., 
Brooklyn SBS Corridor

Launch LaGuardia, Queens 
SBS corridors

Completed

Completed

Launch 34th Street, Manhattan 
SBS Corridor

Completed

Launch Hylan Blvd., Staten 
Island SBS Corridor

Completed

Launch initial Woodhaven Blvd.  Partially 

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Implement bus operations 
improvements on all routes, 
with transit signal prioritization 
on eleven routes in five 
boroughs

Install Bus Time on all 31 bus 
routes in Staten Island and B63 
in Brooklyn

Completed

Improve bus priority of Ed Koch 
Queensboro Bridge and 
approaches

Completed

298

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Improve and expand 
subway and 
commuter rail service

In Progress Construction of the 7 Line Extension is nearly complete 
and is scheduled to open for revenue serivice Q2 2015. 
The first phase of Second Avenue Subway is scheduled 
to be completed in December 2016. The major remaining 
work involves station finishes and systems. Construction 
continues on East Side Access, with revenue service 
expected to begin in December 2022.

Complete construction of 7 
Line extension to the Hudson 
Yards area of far west Midtown

Continue construction of first 
phase of Second Avenue 
Subway

Continue construction of East 
Side Access, the LIRR’s direct 
service to Grand Central Terminal

Partially 
Completed

Complete analysis for North 
Shore Transportation 
Improvements, Staten Island

Allow livery vehicles to accept 
street hails outside of 
Manhattan

Completed

Completed

Expand for-hire 
vehicle service 
throughout our 
neighborhoods

Completed  TLC issued the first Street Hail Livery (SHL) permit in June 
2013 and by November 2013 had issued all 6,000 permits 
in the program’s first year. By March 2014 over 4,300 
Boro Taxis, including nearly 250 wheelchair accessible 
Boro Taxis, were already in service providing call-ahead 
and street hail service in Brooklyn, Bronx, Queens, Staten 
Island, and Northern Manhattan neighborhoods that had 
previously lacked access to safe, convenient and legal 
street hail service. TLC has commenced the second 
issuance of SHL Permits. 

Promote car-sharing

Completed

Expand and improve 
ferry service

In Progress

The City, through DCAS, currently operates the largest 
fleet share program in the United States. In 2014 DCAS 
worked with Zip Car to better identify usage patterns with 
shared vehicles to further enhance operations. DCAS 
renewed its contract with Zip Car in January 2015. 

The City will launch a new Citywide Ferry Service that will 
knit together existing East River routes with new landings 
and services to Astoria, the Rockaways, South Brooklyn, 
Soundview and the Lower East Side. Service will launch 
in 2017. Further expansion to Stapleton and Coney Island 
will constitute a second phase of expansion, pending 
additional funding. The project will include the 
construction of multiple new ferry landings.

Assess car-sharing potential for 
City fleet vehicles

Completed

Launch East River service pilot 
to support the continued 
redevelopment of the East 
River waterfronts

Completed

Make bicycling safer 
and more convenient

In Progress DOT’s bike-sharing program launched in May 2013. In 

2

3

4

5

6

7

N
O

I

T
A
T
R
O
P
S
N
A
R
T

Enhance pedestrian 
access and safety

In Progress

2014, DOT installed 41.3 miles of bike facilities. In 
addition, the bike counting methodology was improved by 
installing loop induction counters on the four East River 
Bridges. The new counters provide a more robust data set 
by counting cyclists all year round. As of January 2015, 
DOT installed 2,318 bike racks at 336 stations; 45 bike 
corrals; and has a total of over 22,400 bike racks (or 
provides 44,800 bike parking spaces). Bike commuting 
has doubled from 2007 levels. 

As of December 2014, pedestrian countdown signals have 
been installed at more than 4,400 intersection, with another 
4,500 intersections expected to be completed by the end of 
2016. The City Council adopted a zoning text amendment 
in May 2013 that partially adopts new guidelines of public 
parking garages that promote pedestrian safety. 
Construction was complete for one Safe Routes to Transit 
projects in 2014. Nine additional locations will be 
constructed in 2015 and 11 to follow in 2016-17. Eight Safe 
Routes to School projects were completed since April 2014, 
bringing the total number of complete to 40. As of January 
2015, 13 locations are under construction and 29 additional 
locations are in the final design phase. DOT’s WalkNYC 
Wayfinding program has installed 100 wayfinging signs in 
neighborhoods in the Bronx, Brooklyn, Manhattan, and 
Queens. As of April 2015, DOT has installed an additional 
50 WalkNYC signs and developed a map-based Greenway 
network sign for future deployment. DOT has also designed 
and launched SBS Wayfinding signs (incorporating real time 
bus arrival information) and subway station neighborhood 
maps using the WalkNYC database and graphic standards.

Double bike commuting from 
2007 levels

Completed

Launch pilot bike-sharing 
program

Install bike racks near 15 
subway stations

Completed

Completed

Install countdown pedestrian 
signals at 1,500 intersections

Completed

Adopt new guidelines for public 
parking garages that promote 
pedestrian safety

Partially 
Completed

Continue to implement Safe 
Routes to Transit projects, 
including nine Bus Stops under 
Els

Partially 
Completed

Implement 32 Safe Routes to 
School projects

Completed

Design a standardized, 
consistent pedestrian 
wayfinding system

Completed

299

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

REDUCE CONGESTION ON OUR ROADS, BRIDGES, AND AT OUR AIRPORTS

In Progress DOT is engaged in outreach to neighborhoods across the 

Pilot technology and 
pricing-based 
mechanisms to 
reduce traffic 
congestion

8

9

Completed

Modify parking 
regulations to 
balance the needs of 
neighborhoods

10

Reduce truck 
congestion on city 
streets

In Progress

11

Improve freight 
movement

In Progress

N
O

I

T
A
T
R
O
P
S
N
A
R
T

12

Improve our 
gateways to the 
nation and the world

In Progress

City to expand the use of the agency’s innovative 
curb-management toolbox. In January 2013, NYCDOT 
completed conversion of the parking meter system to 
multi-space pay stations. In total, this system has over 
13,000 Muni-Meters. In addition, by Winter 2015, the 
Department will have modernized all meters to 
state-of-the art Smart meters. DOT expanded Midtown in 
Motion, an ITS congestion-reduction project, from 34 St. 
to 57 St., river to river. DOT also installed cameras and 
traffic detection equipment on select coastal storm 
evacuation routes including Woodhaven Blvd, Flatbush 
Avenue and Hylan Blvd. 

In May, 2013, Manhattan Core Text Amendment was 
adopted, enacting improvements to off-street parking 
regulations to ensure that the right amount of parking 
spaces is being provided to support Manhattan Core 
businesses, residents and visitors while also addressing 
the city’s sustainability objectives to encourage public 
transit and reduce energy use and greenhouse gas 
emissions.

The City has received $450,000 in grants from FHWA and 
EPA to implement off-hour delivery programs modeled 
after the NYC off-hour delivery program. In addition, DOT 
has received a NYSERDA Grant Funding Award of 
$112,500 to pursue low noise truck tests and $625,000 in 
FHWA funds to expand the program. DOT expanded paid 
commercial parking with the installation of 275 
MuniMeters in the Financial District, the Meatpacking 
District, and sections of Broadway. 

The City is in the process of procuring a consultant to 
assist in a food system resiliency study. This study is 
expected to be completed in 2016. Work has begun on 
rehabilitation of track serving Hunts Point cooperative 
warehouses; tracks for Building B are complete. Doubling 
of lead track and transload platform are currently in 
design. The City is working to expand transload 
operations.

The City continues to advocate for improved aviation 
traffic control, including investments in NextGen 
technology in the New York Region. The JFK Air Cargo 
Study was released in 2013. NYCEDC in conjunction with 
the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has begun 
work on a market and commodity assessment and 
strategic plan for the JFK focused industry. EDC, in 
conjunction with City DOT and the PANYNJ conducted a 
series of outreach meetings in the fall of 2014 with local 
community boards, elected officials and trade groups 
regarding a change to traffic regulations that would allow 
for industry standard 53 foot trailers to access cargo 
facilities at JFK Airport. City DOT published a draft rule 
and solicited public input on the proposed change. (DOT) 
The City adopted a traffic rule change to allow 53-foot 
trailers to access the JFK Airport as long as they used 
major highways and did not enter local streets. Public 
hearings were held in October 2014. The rule will be come 
effective in March 2015. CCTV cameras will be installed at 
key access points to JFK to monitor compliance. 

Expand ParkSmart program to 
three new neighborhoods 

Partially 
Completed

Install 4,500 Muni-Meters

Completed

Install Intelligent Transportation 
Systems (ITS) approach to 
reducing congestion in selected 
areas

Completed

Explore modifications to 
Manhattan Core parking 
regulations

Explore revisions to off-street 
parking requirements in areas 
close to the Manhattan Core 

Implement new peak and 
off-peak delivery windows in 
congested areas

Implement commercial paid 
parking at high-demand 
loading zones citywide

Completed

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Improve landside access to the 
New York Container Terminal

Partially 
Completed

Study the Sheridan Corridor in 
the Bronx

Completed

Launch a study of New York 
City’s food distribution 
pathways

Partially 
Completed

Accommodate more inbound 
freight trains at Hunts Point

Partially 
Completed

Establish new rail transfer hubs 
in Brooklyn and Staten Island

Partially 
Completed

Increase rail and waterborne 
freight deliveries to the South 
Brooklyn Marine Terminal

Completed

Advocate for federal investment 
in NE Corridor passenger rail 
and improved aviation traffic 
control

Partially 
Completed

Launch study of JFK air cargo 
industry

Completed

Improve truck access to JFK

Partially 
Completed

300

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

MAINTAIN AND IMPROVE THE PHYSICAL CONDITION OF OUR ROADS AND TRANSIT SYSTEM

13

14

N
O

I

T
A
T
R
O
P
S
N
A
R
T

In Progress

Seek funding to 
maintain and improve 
our mass transit 
network

The $32 billion capital program was submitted to the 
Capital Program Review Board (CPRB) in October 2014 
for statutory review. At that time it was vetoed without 
prejudice. MTA awaits CPRB direction for resubmission. 
The City continues to stress the need to fully fund the 
MTA’s 2015-2019 Capital Plan and is urging our federal 
and state partners to develop a funding solution for the 
City’s transit infrastructure.

Maintain and improve 
our roads and 
bridges

In Progress DOT owns, operates, and maintains 789 bridges and 
tunnels throughout New York City. Over the past four 
years DOT has spent more than $1 billion on the bridge 
capital program. In 2014, DOT repaved 1,000 lane miles 
of city streets and filled over 254,000 potholes. Legislation 
for joint bidding of public works projects was signed by 
the Governor in summer 2014. 

IMPROVE ENERGY PLANNING 

1

Increase planning 
and coordination to 
promote clean, 
reliable, and 
affordable energy

In Progress

The City continues to advocate for clean, reliable, and 
affordable energy with multiple stakeholder groups, as 
part of its 80 x 50 plan to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions by 80 percent by 2050 and a 30 percent 
reduction in building-based emissions. One City: Built to 
Last, released in September 2014, lays out a ten-year 
plan that will help New York City reduce citywide energy 
use in buildings and promotes the adoption of cleaner 
energy and innovative building technologies. Following 
the release of One City: Built to Last, the City launched a 
technical working group of experts in real estate, 
architecture, engineering, and affordable housing to help 
inform the direction of future policies.

INCREASE OUR ENERGY EFFICENECY 

Fund MTA Capital Program 
beyond 2011

Partially 
Completed

Seek opportunities to improve 
bridge conditions

Partially 
Completed

Seek opportunities to improve 
the state of repair of the city’s 
streets

Partially 
Completed

Seek legislation for joint 
bidding of public works 
projects

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Work with multiple energy 
stakeholders to encourage 
clean energy supply 
investments, effective incentive 
programs, shared data 
collection and management, 
and coordinated energy 
forecasting

 

Y
G
R
E
N
E

2

3

Implement the 
Greener, Greater 
Buildings Plan

In Progress

LL87 submissions were collected for the second year in 
2014. More than 1,000 submissions have been collected. 
The City is continuing to implement, enforce, and expand 
the Greener, Greater, Buildings Plan (GGBP). The final 
benchmarking report on 2013 data and the public 
disclosure of 2014 data were both released in September 
2014. Through One City: Built to Last, the City has 
proposed to expand GGBP requirements to mid-sized 
buildings between 25,000 to 50,000-square feet. A fully 
operational Benchmarking Help Center will be established 
to assist with GGBP compliance.

Complete the development of 
rules and guidelines and fully 
enforce the Greener, Greater 
Buildings Plan

Complete an annual analysis 
and report on benchmarking 
results

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Improve our codes 
and regulations to 
increase the 
sustainability of our 
buildings 

In Progress Green Codes Task Force proposals enacted into law 

include: requirements for commissioning of energy 
systems; increased boiler efficiency; standards for 
attaching rooftop solar PV panels, standards for mold 
prevention, increased lighting efficiency on Construction 
sites; and required insulation of pipes exposed during 
construction. The 2014 NYC Energy Conservation Code 
update was enacted with significant improvements to 
energy performance requirements. 

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Completed

Complete the incorporation of 
the Green Codes Task Force 
proposals into law

Propose amendments to the 
Zoning Resolution and City 
codes to remove the barriers to 
energy efficient building 
envelopes and the sitting of 
clean energy on buildings

Work with the International 
Code Council and ASHRAE to 
bring New York City’s codes 
and the model codes into 
greater alignment 

301

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 4

5

6

7

8

Y
G
R
E
N
E

Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

Initiative 
Status

In Progress

Improve compliance 
with the energy code 
and track green 
building 
improvements 
citywide

Improve energy 
efficiency in smaller 
buildings

In Progress

Through One City: Built to Last, the City has committed to 
enhancing Energy Code enforcement by allocating 
resources to ensure that requirements are fulfilled both in 
the design and construction phase. The City will also 
begin a comprehensive effort to track retrofits in private 
buildings through a new outreach and technical 
assistance program called the Energy and Water Retrofit 
Accelerator.

Through One City: Built to Last, the City allocated funding 
to implement new energy efficiency related GreeNYC 
campaigns for New Yorkers to reduce residential energy 
consumption and develop a strategy to encourage 
efficiency upgrades in smaller buildings.

Aim to achieve compliance by 
2017

Partially 
Completed

Develop a “green report card” 
and an online tracking tool for 
green building improvements

Partially 
Completed

Develop a strategy to increase 
the energy efficiency of smaller 
buildings

Partially 
Completed

Execute GreeNYC public 
education campaigns to 
encourage New Yorkers to 
reduce energy consumption at 
home

Launch an energy efficiency 
competition between residential 
neighborhoods throughout the 
five boroughs

Work with historic preservation 
societies and energy code 
councils to reconcile the energy 
codes with preservation 
requirements 

Partner to create a handbook 
of energy efficiency strategies 
for historic buildings

Improve energy 
efficiency in historic 
buildings

In Progress

The technical working group launched as part of One City: 
Built to Last will consider strategies to improve energy 
efficiency in historic buildings. The City, in partnership 
with the Building Energy Exchange, has also begun 
developing a website that will provide comprehensive, 
updated information on energy efficiency that will include 
information about energy efficiency strategies for historic 
buildings.

Provide energy 
efficiency financing 
and information 

In Progress

In One City: Built to Last, the City announced it will create 
an Energy and Water Retrofit Accelerator to help building 
owners implement energy efficiency projects and navigate 
financing and incentive offerings, including products that 
are available through the New York City Energy Efficiency 
Corporation (NYCEEC). The City will also build out the 
Building Energy Exchange as a physical resource center 
for energy efficiency strategies and technologies and 
create a web portal as a single source of information 
about energy efficiency financing, incentives, and other 
resources.

Create a not-for-profit 
corporation, the New York City 
Energy Efficiency Corporation 
(NYCEEC), to provide energy 
efficiency financing

Create an information center to 
provide comprehensive, 
updated information on energy 
efficiency funding and tax 
incentives

Create a 21st century 
energy efficiency 
workforce

In Progress

Through One City: Built to Last, the City has committed to 
upgrading the skills of building staff in both City-owned 
and private buildings by offering low or no-cost training in 
energy efficiency best practices. These expanded 
trainings are expected to reach a total of more than 7,000 
building operators and will reach new constituencies, 
including building supers and operators who speak 
English as a second language.

Work with Amalgamated Green 
to ensure that we have a 
qualified workforce to 
implement our sustainability 
policy

Partner to launch Green Light 
New York, an energy efficiency 
education center for building 
professionals

Incorporate Energy Code 
training into licensing and 
continuing education 
requirements for electricians

Completed

Not Started

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Adopt national standards for 
energy efficiency professionals

Completed

Completed

Develop and implement a 
sustainable contractors 
designation program for 
electricians, plumbers, and 
general contractors

302

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Make New York City 
a knowledge center 
for energy efficiency 
and emerging energy 
strategies

Provide energy 
efficiency leadership 
in City government 
buildings and 
operations

9

10

Y
G
R
E
N
E

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Initiative 
Status

In Progress

In 2014, the New York City Economic Development 
Corporation partnered with New York University to open 
the Urban Future Lab, a business incubator in Downtown 
Brooklyn that supports startup companies, showcases 
innovation, and provides programming focused on 
sustainable infrastructure and urban resiliency. The 
creation and ongoing operation of the Urban Future Lab is 
expected to generate over 9,000 new jobs by 2025. With 
the release of One City: Built to Last, the City committed 
to creating an Energy and Water Retrofit Accelerator to 
help building owners implement energy efficiency projects 
and navigate the complex market for energy services and 
to engage new communities in developing more energy 
efficient and resilient communities. As part of the Retrofit 
Accelerator, the City will support the creation of a web 
portal for information on energy efficiency. Finally, the City 
is working with Broadway theatres, museums, and other 
iconic cultural institutions to deepen their commitments to 
improving energy efficiency. 

In Progress With the release of One City: Built to Last, the City 

updated the GHG reduction goal for City-owned buildings 
to a 35 percent reduction by 2025. As part of this goal, 
DCAS has implemented the new Accelerated 
Conservation and Efficiency (ACE) competitive capital 
program that rigorously evaluates agency-identified 
energy projects and provides funding for cost-effective 
greenhouse gas reduction projects that agencies 
implement using their own contracts. The City continues 
to explore opportunities for alternative contracting 
vehicles in order to increase our capacity to implement 
the most impactful energy efficiency projects across our 
diverse building portfolio. 
 
DCAS has implemented the Expenses for Conservation 
and Efficiency Leadership (ExCEL) program to provide 
competitively-awarded expense funding to support 
Agencies’ energy priorities including the implementation 
of energy efficient retrofits, operations and maintenance 
measures, training, tools and studies at City agencies.  
 
DCAS created a program called the Preventative 
Maintenance Collaborative, in partnership with OMB, to 
help fund maintenance programs at Agencies to 
implement industry best practices, perform regular routine 
maintenance on building systems, optimize operations, 
save energy and ensure equipment longevity. 
 
DCAS launched the Innovative Demonstrations for Energy 
Adaptability (IDEA) program and designated the Phase 1 
to focus on building controls with implementation 
complete and monitoring underway. Phase 2 of the IDEA 
program is going to focus on energy storage.  
 
DCAS has added standard energy-aligned lease language 
for all new city leased facilities. 
 
The first net-zero school is currently under construction in 
Staten Island by School Construction Authority. DCAS is 
exploring additional public buildings to serve as additional 
net-zero or Passive House pilot projects.

Milestone 
Status

Partially 
Completed

Work with an academic partner 
to create a world-class energy 
efficiency engineering and 
building science program

Partner with an academic 
institution to develop a 
standardized energy database 
and make this data widely 
available

Partially 
Completed

Partner with our cultural 
institutions to showcase the 
best new building strategies 

Partially 
Completed

Pursue a variety of 
procurement mechanisms for 
30 x 17, including Energy 
Savings Performance 
Contracting

Partially 
Completed

Incentivize City agencies to 
reduce energy consumption by 
improving operations and 
maintenance

Partially 
Completed

Create standards and a 
handbook for high 
performance, green renovations 
of typical space types

Partially 
Completed

Create a board to review new 
technologies and pilot them in 
City buildings

Partially 
Completed

Incorporate energy-aligned 
lease language in City 
government leases, and 
promote energy aligned leases 
in the private sector

Partially 
Completed

New York City government to 
pilot net-zero school, a Passive 
House project, and a deep 
energy retrofit project

Partially 
Completed

11

Expand the NYC 
Carbon Challenge to 
new sectors

In Progress

The NYC Carbon Challenge continues to expand. With 
the release of One City: Built to Last, the City committed 
to expand the Challenge to new sectors, increase the 
number of participants in existing sectors, and encourage 
participants to commit to deeper carbon reductions. 

Continue to support the 
University and Hospital 
Challenges, and develop 
“stretch goals”

Partially 
Completed

303

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Launch at least two new 
Carbon Challenges

Milestone 
Status

Completed

PROVIDE CLEANER, MORE RELIABLE, AND AFFORDABLE ENERGY

12

13

In Progress

Support cost-
effective re-powering 
or replacement of our 
most inefficient and 
costly in-city power 
plants

In Progress

Encourage the 
development of clean 
distributed 
generation 

Y
G
R
E
N
E

Advocate for a wholesale 
energy market design that does 
not discourage sensible 
repowering and new generation 
projects

Partially 
Completed

Examine the feasibility of 
developing clean DG at various 
City-owned sites and assets

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Work with utilities and project 
developers to streamline 
permitting and interconnection 
processes and to improve 
coordination of electric and gas 
distribution planning

Advocate for cost-effective 
ratepayer-funded incentives to 
catalyze clean DG development

Partially 
Completed

The City continues to work with the New York State 
electricity market operator to ensure that the latest 
repowering market rules will encourage the entry of 
cleaner and more efficient generation sources, and extend 
appropriate preferences to renewable power in 
recognition of its value in advancing our public policy 
goals. The City has provided comments to the FERC in 
response to NYISO’s application of Buyer-Side mitigation 
rules that appear to be disincentivizing entry of new 
generation.

The City installed a 15 MW cogeneration plant at Rikers 
Island, which was operational as of January 2015, and a 
100 KW fuel cell at City Hall. DEP has led the first of 
several advanced contracts related to the installation of a 
new 12 MW cogeneration plant at the North River WWTP 
and will complete design in 2015. DEP is evaluating the 
feasibility of developing cogeneration at the Wards Island 
WWTP and, in partnership with DCAS, conducted a 
preliminary analysis of cogeneration potential at 26th 
Ward Wastewater Treatment Plant. DCAS also completed 
a cogeneration feasibility study of Woodhull Hospital. In 
June 2014, NYCEDC completed a Smart Grid 
demonstration project at the Brooklyn Army Terminal, as 
part of the DOE’s Smart Grid Demonstration Program 
(administered by Con Ed).  
 
The NYC Mayor’s Office of Sustainability (MOS) has 
submitted comments to the Public Service Commission 
regarding Standard Interconnection Requirement tariffs, 
which streamline permitting and utility interconnection 
processes for small systems. In particular the City has 
called for increasing the threshold from 2 MW to 5 MW, 
greater enforcement of interconnection review deadlines, 
increased transparency in interconnection costs and 
feeder capacities.  

The City has raised barrier issues with NYSERDA as part 
of their Clean Energy Fund development and is 
developing comments regarding NYS PSC Stand-by 
Rate rules that currently create a barrier to expanded DG 
development. In addition, DEP and Con Ed have 
coordinated on gas distribution pipeline replacement 
planning. 
 
The City has submitted comments to the Public Service 
Commission supporting the State Reforming Energy 
Vision initiative (“REV”). The goal of REV is to change the 
paradigm of central generating facilities as the majority 
component of energy generation to include a much 
higher component of distributed energy generation 
resources to increase grid reliability. In its comments, the 
City has made recommendations to enhance the REV 
process, the Clean Energy Fund and the Green Bank 
development. The City is a member of the REV Market 
Design working group. 

304

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

14

Foster the market for 
renewable energy in 
New York City

Initiative 
Status

In Progress

With the release of One City: Built to Last, the City set a goal 
of installing 250 MW of solar PV installations in private 
buildings by 2025. As part of this goal, Sustainable CUNY 

Y
G
R
E
N
E

issued an RFP supported by the Department of Energy for Solar PV installers 
to participate in a pilot program to conduct a NYSolar Smart Solarize in 
Community Board 6 in Brooklyn. The chosen installer(s) will work with 
Sustainable CUNY and partners to form a group purchasing program to drive 
community adoption of Solar PV. Building off of this pilot, along with lessons 
learned from other solarize campaigns, a broader group purchasing program 
will be developed by Sustainable CUNY. An accounting methodology for 
solar energy purchased through a Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) was 
developed for the NYC Carbon Challenge. 
 
Under the leadership of CUNY, the City, NYSERDA, NYPA, NYSIO and the 
utilities are working together to expand the NY Solar Map and Portal with 
support from the US Department of Energy. An expanded tool is expected to 
be launched in September 2015. Through the NYC Solar America Cities 
Partnership, NYCEDC continues to work with MOS, Sustainable CUNY, Con 
Edison and multiple City and State agencies to develop and pilot innovative 
tracking software designed to streamline the permitting process, both 
speeding up solar adoption in NYC and reducing the “soft costs” of 
installation. 
 
With the release of One City: Built to Last, the City has committed to installing 
100 MW of solar PV installations on City-owned buildings property by 2025. 
So far the City has committed to constructing and interconnecting substantial 
solar PV projects at an additional 24 schools by 2016; of which 2 MW at nine 
schools is actively in design. Building on the success of the pilot PPA, DCAS 
is also developing a large-scale solar PPA. In June 2014, NYCEDC completed 
a Smart Grid demonstration project at the Brooklyn Army Terminal, as part of 
the DOE’s Smart Grid Demonstration Program (administered by Con Ed). The 
project includes 100kW of rooftop solar PV and a 170kW VRLA battery. 
Under a pilot solar Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) led by DCAS, 1.8 MW 
of solar PV was installed at four sites across the city including two high 
schools, a maintenance facility and a wastewater treatment plant, with DEP’s 
Port Richmond WWTP being the largest solar PV system on City property.  
 
MOS is coordinating efforts among DSNY, DPR, DEC and SunEdison to 
develop solar at the Fresh Kills Landfill. The City selected SunEdison to 
develop up to 8 MW of solar PV at Fresh Kills landfill, and negotiations are 
ongoing to complete that project. This system will be built, owned, and 
operated by SunEdison, who will also sell the energy generated to third 
parties. DEP has advocated to the NPS to include solar in its Master Plan for 
the development of Fountain Avenue Landfill. The City submitted comments 
to the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) in July 2014 supporting 
NYPA’s application for an offshore wind development proposal of between 
350MW and 700 MW, and urging BOEM to act in a manner that ensures the 
highest and best use of federal resources, noting a potential conflict with an 
offshore LNG proposal. The U.S. Department of Interior has issued a 
statement of competitive interest for offshore wind farm applications in 
federal waters, and now has an active agency review process under way. 
 
DEP received a license from FERC for the development of a 14 MW 
hydroelectric plant at its Cannonsville Dam on May 13, 2014. DEP is starting 
the design phase. In addition, a system-wide evaluation of traditional, small, 
and micro hydroelectric potential in the water supply, water distribution, and 
wastewater systems was completed in November 2013. The report did not 
indicate substantial opportunities for additional development. However, DEP 
continues to monitor the evolution of innovative micro hydroelectric 
technology that may become feasible for implementation. DEP is working 
with National Grid to clean up digester gas from the Newtown Creek WWTP 
to pipeline quality gas to produce renewable natural gas for sale to 
customers. Construction to begin before the end of 2015. Newtown Creek 
WWTP will accept food waste to enhance a waste gas to grid project. That 
system is expected to be operational in Winter 2015.  
 
DEP has almost $500 million allocated in its capital improvement plan for 
2013-2017 to increase the capture and beneficial use of digester gas from 
38% to 58%. DEP is also in design on a 12 MW cogeneration system at the 
North River Wastewater Treatment Plant that will use biogas, generated as 
byproduct of the wastewater treatment process, as a fuel source.

Milestone 
Status

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Work with stakeholders to 
explore ways to pool consumer 
purchasing power and demand 
for locally produced renewable 
energy

Work with Energy Service 
Companies to conduct 
greenhouse gas accounting for 
local purchases of Renewable 
Energy Credits

Develop an online solar map 
and a solar PV performance 
monitoring network to promote 
market growth and improve 
integration with utility planning

Work with Con Edison and 
other parties to explore the 
development of a one-stop, 
centralized website for permit 
application and tracking

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Install small-scale solar PV and 
solar thermal projects at 
City-owned sites

Partially 
Completed

Explore public-private 
partnerships to develop utility 
scale solar energy projects at 
capped municipal landfills

Work with state and federal 
regulators to support 
cost-effective proposals for 
both public and private offshore 
wind projects that will benefit 
New York City

Explore the feasibility of 
developing small scale 
hydroelectric projects at 
upstate reservoirs and in water 
and wastewater distribution 
systems in a cost-effective and 
environmentally sensitive 
manner

Undertake waste-gas-to-grid 
and cogeneration projects at 
City-owned buildings and 
infrastructure sites

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Reuse as an energy resource 
60% of anaerobic digester gas 
produced in our wastewater 
system by 2017

Partially 
Completed

305

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

MODERNIZE OUR TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM

In Progress

15

Encourage 
conversion from 
highly polluting fuels 
by increasing natural 
gas transmission and 
distribution capacity 
and improving 
reliability

The New Jersey/New York pipeline was in installed 
November 2013. Subject to approval by the Federal 
Regulatory Commission, the Williams pipeline is expected 
to enter service before the 2015 peak winter gas demand 
season. Natural gas development and distribution 
regulations and safety standards continue to be reviewed 
at the Federal, State and City level. The City will continue 
to consider opportunities to safely ensure the supply of 
natural gas.

Work with pipeline developers, 
regulators, and community 
stakeholders to facilitate the 
permitting and development of 
appropriately sited natural gas 
transmission lines

Work with utilities, regulators, 
and stakeholders to accelerate 
natural gas distribution 
upgrades in the areas where 
they can have the most impact 
in reducing residual fuel usage 
and improving air quality

Milestone 
Status

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

16

Ensure the reliability 
of New York City 
power delivery

Y
G
R
E
N
E

17

Develop a smarter 
and cleaner electric 
utility grid for New 
York City

In Progress NYSDEC Staff has proposed that IPEC be subject to 

forced outages during summer months as an alternative to 
a closed cycle cooling system. The City will submit expert 
testimony in June, 2015 on the adverse impacts on system 
reliability, energy affordability and emissions. The NYS 
Department of Environmental Conservation has proposed 
denial of a water discharge permit for the Indian Point 
power plant. Entergy, the Indian Point owner, has 
challenged that decision and agency proceedings on the 
challenge are now ongoing at DEC. The City has intervened 
in the DEC case and submitted expert testimony to ensure 
that critical electric reliability and environmental concerns 
are fully considered in the DEC hearing process.  
 
 The City is now working with Con Edison to ensure that 
necessary transmission system upgrades in the 
Pennsylvania-New Jersey-Maryland (PJM) grid territory are 
completed and financed in a manner that is equitable to 
New York ratepayers. With City support, the Champlain-
Hudson Power Express transmission line was granted a 
certificate of approval by the PSC in 2013, and the relevant 
federal permits in late 2014. If built as projected, it would 
deliver up to 1000 MW of clean hydropower from Quebec, 
Canada to Astoria, Queens by 2018.  
 
 DCAS has implemented a new Demand Response 
program for municipal facilities, including City University of 
New York campuses, and wastewater treatment plants. 
The City is on track to increase the number of City 
buildings enrolled in the program to shed load during peak 
demand events to at least 50 MW by 2018. 

In Progress DCAS is leading an effort to enable real time electricity 
metering capabilities in larger locations participating in 
demand response program and continues to work with 
utilities to enhance utility hosted metering programs and 
initiatives. The City has supported Con Edison’s initiatives 
to pilot alternative approaches, including utility-
dispatchable DG and targeted energy efficiency measures 
to meet peak demand growth, in selected networks in lieu 
of traditional distribution capacity investments. The City 
submitted two proposals, one for private sector and one 
for public sector, in response to Con Ed’s request for 
information for their Brooklyn-Queens Demand 
Management network. In proceedings at the PSC, the 
City has and will continue to advocate for improved 
alignment of incentive programs to encourage greater 
participation by the city’s large energy consumers in 
demand management programs. 

Advocate for improved 
regulations and safety standards 
for natural gas production and 
transmission nationwide

Partially 
Completed

Support the continued safe 
operation and relicensing of the 
Indian Point Energy Center 

Partially 
Completed

Explore more robust 
interconnection with 
neighboring power systems 
such as the Pennsylvania-New 
Jersey-Maryland (PJM) grid

Partially 
Completed

Continue to evaluate the costs, 
benefits, and feasibility of other 
transmission line proposals that 
could deliver cleaner energy to 
New York City

Partially 
Completed

Increase ability of City buildings 
to shed load during peak 
demand periods and 
emergency events to 50 MW

Partially 
Completed

Lay the foundation for a 
smarter grid by deploying an 
Energy Enterprise Metering 
System (EEMS) in thousands of 
City-owned buildings

Partially 
Completed

306

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Explore opportunities to 
leverage city wireless 
communication assets to assist 
utilities in conducting 
automated meter reading for 
power and gas customers

Partner with utilities, the private 
sector, and academic 
institutions to demonstrate the 
viability of ‘virtual generation’ to 
allow buildings to sell energy 
curtailment services on 
wholesale electricity markets

Support Con Edison’s efforts to 
capitalize on lessons learned in 
smart-grid demonstration 
projects and to scale up 
cost-effective technologies that 
will help reduce consumption 
or improve grid reliability

Work with regulators, utilities, 
building owners, and energy 
companies to encourage 
deeper participation by 
commercial and industrial 
consumers in market-based 
programs to reduce peak 
demand 

Y
G
R
E
N
E

Y
T

I

L
A
U
Q

 

R

I

A

UNDERSTAND THE SCOPE OF THE CHALLENGE 

1

Monitor and model 
neighborhood-level 
air quality

In Progress

The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene continued 
to monitor criteria air pollutants at 60 core street-level 
sites throughout the city. In June 2014, monitoring began 
at 15 additional sites in high poverty neighborhoods and 
five additional continuous air quality monitors were 
deployed. DOHMH published additional air quality reports 
including: neighborhood-specific “Outdoor Air and 
Health” reports on its Environment and Health Data 
Portal, online charts summarizing trends in levels of 
criteria pollutants over 5 years, and three scientific reports 
on: spatial variation in noise, health benefits of converting 
to cleaner heat fuels and NYC air pollution exposure and 
birth weight.

Maintain a street-level air 
monitoring network to track 
neighborhood air quality 
differences over time

Partially 
Completed

Expand the methods and 
pollutants measured to look 
more closely at specific types 
of emission sources and 
exposure settings

Partially 
Completed

REDUCE TRANSPORTATION EMISSIONS 

2

Reduce, replace, 
retrofit, and refuel 
vehicles

In Progress

The Clean Fleet Transition Plan is now codified fleet policy 
as per the rollout of the Fleet Management Manual (FMM) 
in October 2013. It requires that all agencies replace 
vehicles with equal or more fuel efficient options and that 
any departures from that be approved in writing by the 
Chief Fleet Officer. The City, through DCAS enforces 
CFTP issues all the time, with most replacements 
resulting in fuel efficiencies. DCAS continues to add 
plug-in and natural gas vehicles to the fleet along with 
some right sizing and downsizing.

Reduce the City’s fleet by at 
least 5%

Implement the Clean Fleet 
Transition Plan

Install over 60 electric vehicle 
charging units at City-owned 
facilities and garages

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Expand the use of biodiesel in 
the City’s fleet

Completed

Completed

Complete upgrades of 400 
vehicles through existing 
Congestion Mitigation and Air 
Quality (CMAQ) and other 
funding sources

Install Diesel Particulate Filters 
(DPFs) on 685 buses

Completed

307

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

3

4

5

6

7

Y
T

I

L
A
U
Q

 

R

I

A

Facilitate the 
adoption of electric 
vehicles

In Progress DOT is participating in the EV advisory committee, a five 
year initiative that commenced in 2014. This committee 
will provide an annual report to City Council. In addition, 
EDC is exploring the use of the Skyport parking garage as 
a potential charging station for multiple fleet vehicles.

Reduce emissions 
from taxis, black 
cars, and for-hire 
vehicles

In Progress

The “Green Taxis Act of 2011” was introduced in 2011 
and referred to Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation.

Reduce Illegal Idling

Completed 

In 2014 the City continued working on a campaign to 
educate motorists about idling regulations, particularly 
near the most sensitive populations – schools in areas 
with high asthma rates. The Health Department’s New 
York City Community Health Survey and latest data show 
that New York City has the highest asthma rates among 
children in the country, and in particular the communities 
of East Harlem, and Mott Haven and Hunt’s Point in the 
Bronx, persist in having the highest rates in the city. DEP 
has conducted targeted enforcement at more than 88 
schools and as a result, idling prohibited signage has 
been installed; DEP also works with the NYPD to increase 
targeted enforcement where idling problems are identified. 
DEP also, through the enforcement responsibilities under 
the New York City Air Pollution Code, conducts annual 
outreach to all agency fleet directors of the adverse 
effects of illegal idling by City fleet vehicles. Additionally, 
DEP annually sends idling reminder letters to city schools, 
alerting staff and parent organizations of the idling laws.

Work with the Port 
Authority to 
implement the Clean 
Air Strategy for the 
Port of New York and 
New Jersey

In Progress

The City continues to work with PANYNJ on the Clean Air 
strategy. The new strategy will be released by PANYNJ in 
2015. The Brooklyn Cruise Terminal’s shore power is 
estimated to be completed by summer of 2015, with 
vessel commissioning in Fall of 2015.

Milestone 
Status

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Work with Con Edison and auto 
manufacturers to streamline the 
installation process for home 
EV chargers

Work with parking garage 
owners, co-op boards, 
consumers, and Con Edison to 
ensure that each group 
understands the technical and 
consumer needs associated 
with EV chargers 

Work with private and 
non-profit parties to inform 
New Yorkers about the benefits 
and use of EVs

Work with Congress to pass 
legislation to explicitly allow 
state and local governments to 
incentivize fuel-efficient 
vehicles

Launch an electric vehicle taxi 
pilot program

Completed

Improve compliance of existing 
anti-idling laws through 
targeted enforcement and 
education

Completed

Completed 

Not Started 

Partially 
Completed

Retrofit 20 private ferry boats 
with Diesel Oxidation Catalysts 
(DOCs) and repower nine 
additional vessels to improve 
fuel efficiency

Work with the State to repeal 
the exemption on Petroleum 
Business Tax for bunker fuel

Work with the Port Authority 
and other partners to 
implement the actions outlined 
in the Clean Air Strategy for the 
Port of New York and New 
Jersey

Install shore-power capability 
at the Brooklyn Cruise Terminal

Partially 
Completed

Look for additional 
opportunities at other facilities 
to connect ships to the city’s 
grid

Partially 
Completed

308

Retrofit ferries and 
promote the use of 
cleaner fuels

In Progress DOT has completed upgrades and retrofits on Staten 

Island ferries and 20 privately-operated vessels.

Complete engine upgrades on 
four Staten Island ferries

Completed 

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

Completed

Completed 

Y
T

I

L
A
U
Q

 

R

I

A

E
T
S
A
W

 

D

I

L
O
S

REDUCE EMISSIONS FROM BUILDINGS 

8

Promote the use of 
cleaner-burning 
heating fuels

Completed 

In 2011, the City launched the NYC CleanHeat Program, 
which provides technical, educational, and financial 
assistance to property owners to convert to cleaner fuels 
at a faster pace than required by regulation. The program 
goal is a 50 percent reduction of fine particulate matter 
emissions (PM 2.5) from the use of heavy heating. The 
program helped more than 1,000 buildings convert their 
heavy heating oil to a cleaner fuel this year, and the City is 
working to help all buildings convert their No. 6 oil to a 
cleaner fuel by July of 2015.

Launch a program to 
encourage and support the 
early phase-out of Number 4 
and 6 heating oil 

Release Requests for 
Proposals to enter into energy 
performance contracts for City 
schools

Complete boiler conversions at 
15 schools

Completed

UPDATE CODES AND STANDARDS

9

10

In Progress

Update our codes 
and regulations to 
improve indoor air 
quality

Local Law 72 mandates minimum filtration requirements 
for mechanical ventilation systems in buildings. Local Law 
72 established limits on volatile organic compounds in 
carpet and carpet cushion in the city. Title 15 of the NYC 
Rules removes obstacles to asbestos removal. 

Propose regulations to reduce 
exposure to toxins released by 
building materials

Completed

Update our air quality 
code

Completed  The City completed a revised draft update of the Air 

Update the NYC Air Code

Completed

Pollution Control Code, which addresses currently 
unregulated sources such as cooking emissions, and 
continued to engage stakeholders and city agencies to 
discuss the potential changes to the Code. The revised 
draft code was completed in 2014 and sent to City Council. 

REDUCE WASTE BY NOT GENERATING IT

1

2

Promote waste 
prevention 
opportunities

Increase the reuse of 
materials

In Progress Water fountains designed to accommodate reusable 

bottles are currently being tested for deployment. In 2014, 
DSNY and GreeNYC launched a “Stop Junk Mail” 
campaign to encourage New Yorkers to reduce the 
number of catalogs and other junk mail they receive and 
request paperless service for most household bills. In 
2014, our partner organizations diverted more than 16 
million pounds of material from the waste stream, 
contributing to a reduction of more than 10,000 metric 
tons of greenhouse gas emissions and an energy savings 
of 150 billion BTUs.

Completed GreeNYC partnered with GrowNYC to promote the use of 

reusable bags at all greenmarkets through signage, 
pledges and distribution of reusable bags. In 2013, DSNY 
and Housing Works partnered to launch re-fashioNYC, a 
textile recycling program for buildings with 10 or more 
units that benefits Housing Works, an NYC-based 
non-profit organization. As of January 2015, more than 
500 buildings in all five boroughs participated in 
re-fashioNYC, and another 500 buildings had applied to 
join the program. In 2014, DSNY and GrowNYC partnered 
to host 59 Stop N’ Swap events, one per community 
district. DSNY has continued to support ReuseNYC and 
the NYC Center for Materials Reuse, which promotes 
innovation in materials reuse.

Install redesigned drinking 
fountains in public spaces and 
parks to encourage adoption of 
reusable water bottles 

Partially 
Completed

Implement public education 
campaigns to reduce litter, 
encourage switching to 
reusable bags and reusable 
water bottles for tap water, and 
to encourage New Yorkers to 
reduce paper consumption

Implement public education 
campaign and leverage online 
platforms to encourage and 
increase reuse of materials

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Encourage businesses, 
institutions, and individuals to 
reuse materials 

Completed

INCREASE THE RECOVERY OF RESOURCES FROM THE WASTE STREAM

3

Incentivize recycling

In Progress DSNY has a number of programs in place to help 
incentivize recycling including expansion of public 
recycling bins and revising commercial recycling rules to 
simplify recycling for businesses.

Encourage businesses to 
recycle, and use recyclable and 
recycled materials through 
corporate challenges, 
partnerships, or recognition 
programs 

Improve access to residential 
waste generation and diversion 
rate data

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Implement new residential 
recycling penalties 

Not Started 

309

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

4

5

6

7

8

E
T
S
A
W

 

D

I

L
O
S

Improve the 
convenience and 
ease of recycling 

Revise City codes 
and regulations to 
reduce construction 
and demolition waste 

Create additional 
opportunities to 
recover organic 
material

Initiative 
Status

In Progress

In 2014, DSNY increased the number of public space 
recycling baskets to more than 3,000 across the City. 
DSNY is prioritizing neighborhoods with historically low 
diversion rates for the placement of new public space 
recycling baskets to increase public awareness about 
recycling in those neighborhoods. On January 1, 2015, 
DSNY issued a determination that expanded polystyrene 
foam, commonly known as “styrofoam,” is not recyclable 
in the City’s metal, glass, and plastic recycling program. 
As of July 1, 2015, foam food-service products and 
packing peanuts will be banned in New York City, 
eliminating this non-recyclable product from the waste 
stream. DSNY and the Department of Small Business 
Services will conduct outreach to small businesses to 
help them find affordable and sustainable alternative 
products. Removing non-recyclable materials from the 
waste stream makes recycling simpler and more 
streamlined. 

In Progress As part of the New York City Building Code update 

passed on December 30, 2013, a provision was added 
through Local Law 141 of 2013 that increases the 
proportion of alternative cementitious material to Portland 
cement in concrete exposed to deicing chemicals from 25 
percent to 35 percent for a single alternative material. For 
multiple alternative materials, the total amount must not 
exceed 50 percent.

In Progress DSNY has expanded the curbside organics collection 

program to service more than 100,000 households, 700 
schools, and several agencies and institutions. In Spring 
2015, DSNY is adding an additional 40,000 households. 
DSNY continues to support the expansion of community 
compost sites and food waste drop-off sites in all five 
boroughs, giving New Yorkers the opportunity to compost 
in their neighborhoods. DEP is continually looking for 
opportunities to recover energy from its biosolids in a 
fiscally responsible manner. Although we have contracts 
to beneficially use approximately 30 percent of the 
biosolids the City produces, the vendor’s compost facility 
has run into some regulatory problems. As such, no 
biosolids are currently being reused beneficially. It is 
expected that the beneficial reuse contractor will resolve 
their regulatory problems in 2015 and beneficial use can 
resume. Pilot program to take in food waste from schools 
and process it into a bioslurry for anaerobic digestion at 
the Newtown Creek WWTP were completed in May 2014. 
Construction for a 250 tons per day system is beginning 
in 2015. 

Identify additional 
markets for recycled 
materials

In Progress DOT’s use of road renovation spoils (RAP) increased with 

the rebuilding of the Brooklyn Municipal asphalt plant. 
DOT increase RAP use to 50 percent from 40 percent at 
the Brooklyn facility, which supplies half of DOT’s asphalt 
need. DSNY continues to explore and identify additional 
markets for recycled materials.

Increase recycling in public 
spaces and parks

Partially 
Completed

Require new residential 
buildings to provide space for 
recycling

Partially 
Completed

Expand recycling education 
programs

Partially 
Completed

Require use of recycled content 
in building materials

Completed

Require recycling of building 
materials

Partially 
Completed

Expand opportunities for 
communities to compost food 
waste

Expand leaf and yard waste 
composting 

Complete the curbside 
organics feasibility study 

Implement a public-private 
textiles recycling program in 
every borough

Encourage use of new 
technologies to increase 
recovery of commercial food 
waste 

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Encourage in-city opportunities 
to recover yellow grease and 
convert it to biofuel

Partially 
Completed

Pursue opportunities to 
beneficially use biosolids 

Explore expansion of 
designated plastics

Promote beneficial use of 
dredge and road renovation 
spoils

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Pilot conversion 
technologies 

Cancelled

Proposals were received to develop a conversion 
technology facility to dispose of waste. The RFP was 
cancelled in 2014 because none of the proposals were 
cost-effective, there were also siting concerns raised by 
elected officials and residents.

Solicit proposals to develop 
conversion technology facilities 
to dispose of waste

Cancelled

310

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

IMPROVE THE EFFICIENCY OF THE WASTE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

9

10

11

E
T
S
A
W

 

D

I

L
O
S

Reduce the impact of 
the waste system on 
communities 

In Progress With the construction of the Sims recycling facility at the 

South Brooklyn Marine Terminal, DSNY expanded the 
City’s metal, glass, and plastic recycling program to include 
all rigid plastics. This change has contributed to an 
increase in curbside diversion rates from 14.7 percent in 
the first four months of FY14 to 15.3 percent in the same 
period in FY15. After a year of operation, the North Shore 
MTS will begin accepting commercial waste in limited 
quantities. Investments in railroad development and rail 
access at transfer stations in the Bronx, Queens, and 
Brooklyn have created opportunities for those communities 
to export some commercial waste in sealed railcars.

Improve commercial 
solid waste 
management data

In Progress DSNY and BIC are working together to simplify 

commercial recycling rules and streamline the data 
submission process for carters and transfer stations. 
DSNY has also published the 2012 Commercial Waste 
System study and continues to explore opportunities to 
improve NYC’s commercial waste system. 

Remove toxic 
materials from the 
general waste stream 

In Progress On January 1, 2015, a state law banning the curbside 

disposal of electronic waste took effect. DSNY has 
engaged in extensive public education and outreach to 
help New Yorkers comply with this law, including issuing 
warnings to residents who improperly set out electronics 
for curbside collection. In April 2015, DSNY established a 
rule allowing Sanitation Officers and Enforcement agents 
to issue tickets to residents for improper disposal of 
electronic waste. As of April 2015, more than 4,000 
buildings in all five boroughs have applied to participate in 
e-cycleNYC, an electronics recycling program DSNY 
created in partnership with Electronics Recycling 
International for buildings with 10 or more units. More 
than 900 of those buildings currently participate, and 
DSNY is working with GrowNYC to bring additional 
buildings into the program. New Yorkers can also recycle 
electronic waste at more than 95 drop-off locations 
citywide. DSNY has opened a new Household Hazardous 
Waste Site in Manhattan and extended hours at sites in all 
five boroughs. In 2015, DSNY will expand the number of 
SAFE Disposal events to 10 from 5 in each borough. In 
2014, New Yorkers brought nearly 700,000 pounds of 
electronics, pharmaceuticals, and household hazardous 
waste to SAFE Disposal events for proper recycling, 
handling, and disposal. DSNY continues to support 
programs and policies that encourage extended producer 
responsibility of hazardous and toxic products. In 2015, 
DSNY established new rules that allow the Department to 
bill the manufacturers of CFC-containing items for the 
cost of refrigerant recovery.

REDUCE THE CITY GOVERNMENT’S SOLID WASTE FOOTPRINT 

12

Revise City 
government 
procurement 
practices

In Progress Continue to research procurement best practices to 

reduce solid waste. 

Milestone 
Status

Completed

Achieve significant progress 
toward completion of the 
Hamilton (Brooklyn) and North 
Shore (Queens) Marine Transfer 
Stations

Open the Sims recycling facility Completed

Promote export of commercial 
waste by barge and rail 

Partially 
Completed

Complete the Comprehensive 
Commercial Waste System 
Study and implement 
recommendations

Completed

Improve access to commercial 
carter information and disposal 
practices

Partially 
Completed

Expand Household Hazardous 
Waste collection program

Completed

Enhance the public’s access to 
information about and 
participation in the NYS 
e-waste program 

Partially 
Completed

Promote product stewardship 
programs for high toxicity 
products

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Develop best practices that 
address solid waste reduction 
for procurement and 
incorporate into 
Environmentally Preferable 
Purchasing

Incentivize city vendors to 
recover and reuse products

Not Started 

311

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

13

Improve the City 
government’s 
diversion rate

Completed DSNY has expanded curbside organics collection to 

service more than 700 schools and many agencies and 
other institutions. Waste from New York City schools is 
comprised of 40 percent paper, 40 percent organic 
material, 10 percent metal, glass, and plastic, and 10% 
other items, making them ideal candidates for intensive 
recycling programs. DSNY has partnered with DOE to 
launch the Zero Waste Schools initiative to make targeted 
investments in staff training, student curriculum, and 
recycling infrastructure with the goal of zero waste from 
participating schools sent to landfills. DSNY has also 
partnered with the New York City Housing Authority to 
develop an aggressive plan to bring all NYCHA 
developments into compliance with the City’s recycling 
laws over the next five years. In 2015, NYCHA will invest 
$15 million to create new recycling centers and will train 
residents and staff on the importance of proper recycling.

Improve quality of and access 
to City government solid waste 
generation data

Develop pilot at targeted City 
buildings to measure diversion 
rate

Ensure all DOE schools have 
sustainability plans (including 
recycling) and designate a 
sustainability coordinator

Sponsor packaging contest 
with design schools and 
corporate sponsors for 
products with high city agency 
consumption 

REDUCE AND TRACK GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS

1

2

Release an annual 
inventory of 
greenhouse gas 
emissions

Assess opportunities 
to further reduce 
greenhouse gas 
emissions by 80% by 
2050

In Progress

The City released its most recent annual inventory of 
greenhouse gas emissions in November 2014, 
demonstrating a 19 percent decrease in emissions.

Expand GHG inventory to 
include neighborhood level 
analysis and reporting

Completed

In Progress

The City has adopted a goal to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions 80% by 2050.

Complete study to determine 
strategies to reduce citywide 
GHG emissions by 80% below 
2005 levels by 2050

Completed

ASSESS VULNERABILITIES AND RISKS FROM CLIMATE CHANGE

3

4

5

Regularly assess 
climate change 
projections

In Progress

The City continues to assess climate change projections 
on a regular basis. For further updates on this initiative, 
refer to the City’s resiliency program updates.

Partner with the 
Federal Emergency 
Management Agency 
(FEMA) to update 
Flood Insurance Rate 
Maps

Develop tools to 
measure the city’s 
current and future 
climate exposure

In Progress

The City continues to partner with FEMA to update the 
City’s flood insurance rate maps. For further updates on 
this initiative, refer to the City’s resiliency program 
updates.

In Progress

The City continues to develop tools to measure the city’s 
current and future climate exposure. For further updates 
on this initiative, refer to the City’s resiliency program 
updates. 

E
T
S
A
W

 

D

I

L
O
S

E
G
N
A
H
C

 

E
T
A
M

I

L
C

INCREASE THE RESILIENCE OF THE CITY’S BUILT AND NATURAL ENVIROMENT

6

Update regulations to 
increase the 
resilience of buildings

In Progress

The City has updated regulations to increase the 
resiliency of buildings. For further updates on this 
initiative, refer to the City’s resiliency program updates.

Conduct study of the urban 
design implications of 
enhanced flood protection for 
buildings 

Pursue amendments to 
freeboard requirements to 
require freeboard for wider 
range of buildings to account 
for climate change projections

Institutionalize New York City 
Panel on Climate Change 
(NPCC) and establish process 
to regularly update its climate 
projections

Release draft updated Digital 
Flood Insurance Rate Maps 
(DFIRMS) for public comment

Completed

Completed

Develop a climate risk 
assessment tool

Develop an updated digital 
elevation model using LiDAR 
data to promote more accurate 
sea level rise modeling

Launch effort to develop 
publicly-available projected 
flood maps that incorporate 
sea level rise projections for 
planning purposes

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

312

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

7

8

9

E
G
N
A
H
C

 

E
T
A
M

I

L
C

Incorporate consideration of 
climate change within the 
policies of the City’s Waterfront 
Revitalization Program (WRP)

Launch study of effects of 
rising water tables, inland 
flooding, wind, and extreme 
heat events on buildings

Work with the 
insurance industry to 
develop strategies to 
encourage the use of 
flood protections in 
buildings

In Progress

The City continues to work with the insurance industry to 
develop strategies to encourage the use of flood 
protections in buildings. For further updates on this 
initiative, refer to the City’s resiliency program updates.

Explore measures to promote 
flood protection in areas that 
may be subject to flooding 
based on climate change 

Protect New York 
City’s critical 
infrastructure

In Progress

The City continues to work to protect the city’s critical 
infrastructure. For further updates on this initiative, refer to 
the City’s resiliency program updates..

Identify and evaluate 
citywide coastal 
protective measures

In Progress

The City continues to identify, evaluate, and implement 
citywide coastal protection measures. For further updates 
on this initiative, refer to the City’s resiliency program 
updates.

Complete Climate Change 
Adaptation Task Force 
assessment and report and 
begin to implement its 
recommendations

Maintain the Climate Change 
Adaptation Task Force with an 
expanded focus on public 
health and safety services

Assess the opportunities for the 
incorporation of climate change 
projections into design 
specifications and standards 
for critical infrastructure

Develop an inventory of best 
practices for enhancing climate 
resilience in coastal areas

Coordinate with academic 
institutions, scientists, 
engineers, and designers to 
develop pilot projects to test 
potential strategies and 
evaluate their costs and 
benefits

Milestone 
Status

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

PROTECT PUBLIC HEALTH FROM THE EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE

10

Mitigate the urban 
heat island effect

In Progress

The City continues to mitigate the urban heat island 
effect. For further updates on this initiative, refer to the 
City’s resiliency program updates.

11

Enhance our 
understanding of the 
impacts of climate 
change on public 
health

In Progress

The City continues to enhance its understanding of the 
impacts of climate change on public health. For further 
updates on this initiative, refer to the City’s resiliency 
program updates.

Coat an additional two million 
square feet of cool roofs 

Completed

Pursue a cool roof requirement 
for existing buildings

Completed

Work with neighborhoods most 
impacted by the urban heat 
island effect to develop and 
implement community-specific 
strategies

Complete study on the impact 
of climate change on public 
health

Completed

Completed

313

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
Number

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

E
G
N
A
H
C

 

E
T
A
M

I

L
C

INCREASE CITY’S PREPAREDNESS FOR EXTREME CLIMATE EVENTS

12

Integrate climate 
change projections 
into emergency 
management and 
preparedness

In Progress

The City continues to integrate climate change projections 
into emergency management and preparedness. For 
further updates on this initiative, refer to the City’s 
resiliency program updates.

Integrate climate change 
projections into the City’s 
emergency management and 
preparedness plans and 
procedures

Launch a process to include 
climate change as a hazard 
assessed under the Natural 
Hazard Mitigation Plan

CREATE RESILIENT COMMUNITIES THOUGH PUBLIC INFORMATION AND OUTREACH 

13

Work with 
communities to 
increase their climate 
resilience

In Progress

The City continues to work with communities to increase 
their climate resiliency. For further updates on this 
initiative, refer to the City’s resiliency program updates.

Ensure that outreach efforts 
target appropriate communities 
and provide up-to-date climate 
risk information

Improve the access to 
publicly-available data on the 
locations of hazardous material 
storage in flood zones 
throughout the city

Milestone 
Status

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

314

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 315

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 2013 Resiliency 
Initiatives

316

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City nyc.gov/onenyc1

2

3

4

5

6

S

I

S
Y
L
A
N
A

 

E
T
A
M

I

L
C

N
O

I

T
C
E
T
O
R
P

 

L
A
T
S
A
O
C

Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

STRENGTHEN THE QUALITY OF AVAILABLE CLIMATE ANALYSIS

Work with FEMA to improve 
the flood-mapping process

In Progress  The City continues to work with FEMA to improve the flood 

mapping process and provided expert analysis in FEMA’s most 
recent release of Preliminary FIRMs. The first Technical Mapping 
Advisory Council meeting, on which the City sits, was held in 
September 2014. The next one will be held in May 2015. 

The City has partnered with the Center For New York City 
Neighborhoods (CNYCN) on its interactive webtool (floodhelpny.
org), which was launched in September 2014. Additionally, the 
City is conducting a consumer education campaign and 
developing tools for explaining flood risk and the changes that 
are coming to the maps and insurance programs. Finally, the 
City continues to advise FEMA on its local flood risk messaging 
and online tools.

Completed NOAA and the USACE have agreed to incorporate the most 

recent NPCC projections into their climate models.

Completed

The City released expanded NPCC projections to include 
humidity and new projections through 2100. NPCC3 will focus 
on the following: enhancing coordination across the entire New 
York metropolitan region, looking at a neighborhood scale, and 
studying the interactions of mitigation, adaptation, and equity. 

In Progress  The City, with Stevens Institute of Technology, has completed its 

study of Sea Level Rise mapping, which was incorporated into 
the NPCC’s most recent report. NPCC has also developed 
future flood maps to show the projected floodplains.

Completed

Implement 
technical and 
process 
improvements

Launch a new 
interactive tool

Completed

Obtain Federal 
agreement to rely 
on NPCC

Completed

Issue expanded 
NPCC 
projections; 
release 
evaluation metric 
for climate 
change

Develop revised 
future flood maps

Completed

Completed

In Progress  The City, in partnership with the Nature Conservancy, has 

launched a new urban heat island working group to develop 
new monitoring methods and tools for mitigating heat risk.

Launch pilot 
program

Partially 
Completed

Work with FEMA to improve 
the communication of current 
flood risks

In Progress

Call on the State and Federal 
governments to coordinate 
with the City on local climate 
change projections

Continue to refine local 
climate change projections to 
inform decision-making

Explore improved 
approaches for mapping 
future flood risks, 
incorporating sea level rise

Launch a pilot program to 
identify and test strategies for 
protecting vulnerable 
neighborhoods from extreme 
heat health impacts

INCREASE COASTAL EDGE ELEVATIONS

1

2

3

4

5

Continue to work with the 
USACE to complete 
emergency beach 
nourishment in Coney Island

Continue to work with the 
USACE to complete 
emergency beach 
nourishment on the 
Rockaway Peninsula

Complete short-term beach 
nourishment, dune 
construction, and shoreline 
protection on Staten Island

Install armor stone shoreline 
protection(revetments) in 
Coney Island

Completed Over 600,000 cubic yards of sand have been placed on Coney 

Island.

Completed Over 3,500,000 cubic yards of sand have been placed on the 

Rockaway Peninsula.

Completed  Over 26,000 linear feet of shoreline protection and reinforced 

dunes have been installed on Staten Island. Additional 
reinforced dune projects are expected to be installed in 
Tottenville with State funds. 

In Progress

The City launched a feasibility study that will generate specific 
recommendations for investments in shoreline protection along 
Coney Island Creek. The study is expected be finished in 
December 2015, leading to design and construction, with over 
$30 million in funds already available.

Install armor stone shoreline 
protection (revetments) on 
Staten Island

In Progress

The City launched a citywide assessment of low-lying shorelines 
that will generate specific recommendations for investments in 
shoreline protection along the South Shore of Staten Island. The 
assessment is expected to be finished in December 2015, 
leading to design and construction, with over $30 million in 
funds already available. This work will be coordinated with other 
Federal and State investments underway on the South Shore. 

Complete beach 
nourishment 
projects

Completed

Complete beach 
nourishment 
projects

Completed

Complete beach 
nourishment and 
related projects

Completed

Begin design

Partially 
Completed

Begin design

Partially 
Completed

317

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

6

7

8

9

Raise bulkheads in low-lying 
neighborhoods across the 
city to minimize inland tidal 
flooding

Complete emergency 
bulkhead repairs adjacent to 
the Belt Parkway in Southern 
Brooklyn

Complete bulkhead repairs 
and roadway drainage 
improvements adjacent to 
Beach Channel Drive on the 
Rockaway Peninsula

Continue to work with the 
USACE to complete 
emergency floodgate repairs 
at Oakwood Beach, Staten 
Island

Initiative 
Status

In Progress

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

The City launched a citywide assessment of low-lying shorelines 
that will generate specific recommendations for investments in 
shoreline protection across the city. The assessment is 
expected to be finished in December 2015, leading to design 
and construction, with approximately $40 million in funds 
already available. 

Launch study of 
low-lying 
neighborhoods; 
begin selected 
implementation

Milestone 
Status

Partially 
Completed

Completed  Emergency repairs were completed in 2013.

In Progress  Construction of all bulkhead repairs and related drainage 

improvements is expected by Summer 2015.

Completed

Emergency floodgate repairs were completed.

Complete 
bulkhead repairs

Completed

Complete 
bulkhead repairs 
and related 
drainage 
improvements

Complete 
floodgate repairs

Partially 
Completed

Completed

10

Complete tide gate repair 
study at Flushing Meadows 
Corona Park, Queens

In Progress  The City expects to receive approximately $5 million in FEMA 

funds for this initiative and will launch the tide gate repair study 
upon approval by FEMA. 

Study tide gate 
repairs

Partially 
Completed

MINIMIZE UPLAND WAVE ZONES

Continue to work with the 
USACE to complete existing 
studies of the Rockaway 
Peninsula and implement 
coastal protection projects

In Progress  The City continues to work with the USACE on its Rockaway 
Reformulation Study. Investment options on the beach and in 
Jamaica Bay are currently being evaluated, with final selection 
of preferred alternatives expected in 2015. Design and 
construction will follow, with Federal funds already available.

Begin study of 
flood risk 
reduction 
projects; 
complete 
identified 
short- term dune 
improvements

Begin study

Completed

Partially 
Completed

In Progress

The City expects to receive approximately $58 million in FEMA 
funds for this initiative and will launch the dune system design 
study upon approval by FEMA. 

N
O

I

T
C
E
T
O
R
P

 

L
A
T
S
A
O
C

11

12

13

14

15

16

Call on and work with the 
USACE to study and install 
primary and secondary dune 
systems in vulnerable 
Rockaway Peninsula 
neighborhoods (such as 
Breezy Point)

Call on and work with the 
USACE to study and install 
offshore breakwaters 
adjacent to and south of 
Great Kills Harbor

Call on and work with the 
USACE to study and install 
wetlands for wave 
attenuation in Howard Beach 
and to study further flood 
protection improvements 
within Jamaica Bay

Call on and work with the 
USACE to study and install 
living shorelines for wave 
attenuation in Tottenville

Continue to work with the 
USACE to complete its 
Plumb Beach breakwater and 
beach nourishment project in 
Southern Brooklyn

In Progress

In partnership with the City, the State has launched a study to 
evaluate offshore breakwater designs in Great Kills. The study is 
currently underway and anticipated to be completed in 2015.

Begin study

Completed

In Progress  Design is already underway for wetlands and wave attenuation 

Begin study

Completed

investments in Howard Beach at Spring Creek and in Broad 
Channel at Sunset Cove, with funds already available for 
construction. 

In Progress  The State was awarded $60 million through HUD’s Rebuild by 

Begin study

Completed

Design program for implementation of the project.

Completed 

In partnership with DPR, the project was completed by the 
USACE in 2014.

Complete 
construction

Completed

318

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City N
O

I

T
C
E
T
O
R
P

 

L
A
T
S
A
O
C

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

Completed

17

18

Complete living shorelines 
and floating breakwaters for 
wave attenuation in Brant 
Point, Queens

Continue to work with the 
USACE to complete its Sea 
Gate project in Southern 
Brooklyn

PROTECT AGAINST STORM SURGE

In Progress  The City, through DEP, has completed the installation of a 

floating wave attenuator adjacent to a tidal wetland at Brant 
Point, Queens as part of a five-month study to evaluate the 
attenuation of wave energy against the wetland edge and 
accretion of sediment.

Complete 
construction

In Progress Construction is underway and is expected to be completed in 

2015.

Complete 
construction

Partially 
Completed

Install an integrated flood 
protection system in Hunts 
Point

In Progress

The City was awarded $20 million through HUD’s Rebuild by 
Design program for continued design and implementation of a 
pilot project, and the City subsequently allocated an additional 
$25 million to the project. The City is coordinating these 
investments with other City-funded projects and will launch the 
next phase of design and implementation in 2015.

Begin design

Completed

In Progress

The City has allocated $1 million to begin planning and 
preliminary design for this project, which will begin in 2015. 

Begin design

Not 
Completed

Install an integrated flood 
protection system in East 
Harlem

Install an integrated flood 
protection system in Lower 
Manhattan, including the 
Lower East Side

In Progress

Install an integrated flood 
protection system at Hospital 
Row

In Progress

The City was awarded $335 million through HUD’s Rebuild by 
Design program for continued design and implementation of the 
project, which is currently in design north of Montgomery Street. 
A final conceptual design is expected to be completed in 2015, 
with a goal of starting construction in 2017. The City and State 
also allocated $6.75 million in additional funds to begin design 
south of Montgomery Street, including funds for implementing 
an $8 million in City funds for first-phase investment in Battery 
Park. The City continues to pursue additional funds for this 
project.

The City is no longer pursuing an integrated flood protection 
system for Hospital Row. In its place, the three primary hospitals 
between 23rd Street and 34th Street are investing in higher 
levels of flood protection and storm hardening measures, and 
has secured hundreds of millions in FEMA funds at Bellevue 
Hospital alone. 

Begin design

Completed

Launch 
competition; 
begin design

Completed 

Install an integrated flood 
protection system in Red 
Hook

In Progress

The City and State have each committed $50 million for an 
integrated flood protection system in Red Hook. The City has 
released an RFP for design services and expects to begin 
design in 2015.

Begin design

Partially 
Completed

Continue to work with the 
USACE to complete existing 
studies on Staten Island and 
implement coastal protection 
projects

Continue to work with Con 
Edison to protect the 
Farragut substation

Call on and work with the 
USACE to study and install 
local storm surge barriers at 
Newtown Creek

In Progress  The USACE is now expected to complete its draft feasibility 

Complete study

study for Phase 1 in May 2015, with a goal of starting 
construction in 2017. The City has committed $50 million in 
local matching funds for the project and expects to hear the 
results of the USACE Phase 2 feasibility study in 2015.

Partially 
Completed 

In Progress

Through a settlement with ConEd, the State, and the City, 
ConEd is investing in storm hardening at critical substations 
across the city, as part of its $1 billion storm hardening program.

File comments 
on rate case

Completed

In Progress

The City has launched a feasibility study for a Newtown Creek 
local storm surge barrier.

Begin study

Completed

319

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

IMPROVE COASTAL DESIGN AND GOVERNANCE

Completed

Continue to work with the 
USACE to complete its 
comprehensive flood 
protection study of New York 
Harbor

The USACE released its North Atlantic Coast Comprehensive 
Study in January 2015. The City is now working with the USACE 
to launch a new feasibility study for NY Harbor and its 
tributaries, with the expectation that it will result in projects 
ready for authorization by Congress.

Implement the WAVES Action 
Agenda

In Progress All of the recommendations from the Waves Action Agenda 

have been completed or reconsidered.

Implement citywide 
waterfront inspections to 
better manage the City’s 
waterfront and coastal assets

In Progress  The City has allocated funds to update its portfolio of waterfront 
assets within its Waterfront Facilities Maintenance Management 
System and is revising its Inspection Guidelines Manual to 
better account for new coastal protection assets.

Complete draft 
study, 
recommending 
projects ready for 
authorization by 
Congress

Complete 
scheduled 
projects

Implement 
program

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

N
O

I

T
C
E
T
O
R
P

 

L
A
T
S
A
O
C

Study design guidelines for 
waterfront and coastal assets 
to better mitigate the effects 
of flooding

Evaluate soft infrastructure as 
flood protection and study 
innovative coastal protection 
techniques

Evaluate the city’s 
vulnerability to drainage pipe 
flooding and identify 
appropriate solutions to 
minimize those risks

Evaluate strategies to fund 
wetland restoration and 
explore the feasibility of 
wetland mitigation banking 
structures

Work with agency partners to 
improve the in-water 
permitting process

Enhance waterfront 
construction oversight by 
strengthening the City’s 
waterfront permit and 
dockmaster units

Identify a lead entity for 
overseeing the collaboration 
on the USACE 
comprehensive study and for 
overseeing the 
implementation of coastal 
flood protection projects

Call on and work with the 
USACE and FEMA to 
collaborate more closely on 
flood protection project 
standards

Completed

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Completed

In Progress  The City, through DPR, has launched a study to evaluate 

Complete study

resiliency design guidelines for waterfront and coastal 
structures. This study will be completed in 2015.

In Progress 

In partnership with the City, the State has completed and 
released a study to evaluate the effectiveness of natural and 
nature-based infrastructure. The City continues to work closely 
with State and Federal agencies to advance natural and 
nature-based features as part of its coastal protection initiatives, 
and the City, in partnership with NPS, has launched a CUNY-led 
Science and Resilience Institute at Jamaica Bay to research 
innovative resiliency measures. 

Partner with the 
planned Jamaica 
Bay Science and 
Resilience Center 
and others to 
begin studies

In Progress  This work will occur as a regular part of all of the City’s coastal 

protection projects.

In Progress  The City has allocated funds for the construction of wetland 
restoration in Saw Mill Creek as part of a pending mitigation 
banking program. Construction is expected to begin in 2015.

Complete study 
as part of other 
coastal 
protection 
projects

Complete study 
of mitigation 
banking

In Progress  The City, through NYCEDC, is gathering information on all 

Launch website

relevant waterfront permit processes from federal, state and 
local regulatory partners and is in the early stages of website 
design that will make permitting more predictable. 

In Progress  Additional personnel have been added to the Waterfront Permit 

Unit and new procedures have improved the permit filing 
process. The City continues to explore methods to enhance 
waterfront permitting. 

Completed

The Office of Recovery and Resiliency (ORR) has been 
designated as the lead entity for the City’s coastal protection 
initiatives.

Explore options 
to enhance 
waterfront 
permitting and 
dockmaster 
function

Identity lead 
entity

In Progress

The City has convened FEMA and USACE to ensure that 
projects are coordinated.

Identify risk 
reduction 
standards

Completed

320

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

STRENGTHEN NEW AND SUBSTANTIALLY REBUILT STRUCTURES TO MEET THE  
HIGHEST RESILIENCY STANDARDS MOVING FORWARD

1

2

3

4

5

6

S
G
N

I

D
L

I

U
B

In Progress

Improve regulations for flood 
resiliency of new and 
substantially improved 
buildings in the 100-year 
floodplain

The City has adopted changes to the zoning code, including a 
new Flood Resilience Zoning Text Amendment. This action 
clarified building and mechanical equipment elevation and 
measurement, freeboard, alternative uses of ground floor space, 
and parking issues; these zoning text changes are now in effect. 
Sixteen updates were made to the building code, including 
Local Law 83, which is designed to prevent the backflow of 
sewage; Local Law 96, regarding the adoption of best available 
flood maps; and Local Law 99, which allows the elevation of 
certain building systems in flood-prone areas including 
telecommunications cabling and fuel storage tanks.

Completed

Adopt changes 
to Construction 
Codes and 
zoning

In Progress As of April 2015, the Mayor’s Office of Housing Recovery 

Rebuild and repair housing 
units destroyed and 
substantially damaged by 
Sandy

Operations (HRO), through its Build it Back program, has made 
over 9,200 offers to homeowners, started construction on 1,159 
homes, and granted 3,298 reimbursement checks amounting to 
over $60 million. As part of the Build it Back multifamily 
program, run jointly with HPD, HPD has provided over $24 
million in repairs and reimbursements to multifamily buildings, 
benefiting over 6,400 households. HRO is quadrupling its 
design and construction capacity in 2015 and has introduced a 
number of new initiatives, including temporary rental assistance 
to homeowners in construction, to assist applicants.

The City launched 10 land use resiliency studies (Harding Park, 
Edgewater Park, West Chelsea, East Village/Lower East Side/
Two Bridges, Canarsie, Gerritsen Beach, Sheepshead Bay, Old 
Howard Beach/Hamilton Beach/Broad Channel, Rockaway 
Beach/Rockaway Park, Staten Island East Shore). Additionally, 
the City released a report Retrofitting Buildings for Flood Risk to 
offer guidance to building owners that are making resiliency 
investments.

Completed

Disburse funds 
to rebuild and 
repair 500 
buildings

Completed

Begin studies for 
5-10 
neighborhoods 
and citywide 
strategies

In Progress

Study and implement zoning 
changes to encourage 
retrofits of existing buildings 
and construction of new 
resilient buildings in the 
100-year floodplain

Launch a competition to 
encourage development of 
new, cost-effective housing 
types to replace vulnerable 
stock

Work with New York State to 
identify eligible communities 
for the New York Smart 
Home Buyout Program

Amend the Building Code 
and complete studies to 
improve wind resiliency for 
new and substantially 
improved buildings

In Progress

The City is no longer pursuing this competition. In its place, 
HPD has developed prototypes for new cost-effective housing 
to replace vulnerable structures.

Completed

Launch and 
award Phase I of 
competition and 
launch Phase II

In Progress

The City continues to coordinate with the State on its buyout 
program in Oakwood Beach, Ocean Breeze, and Graham 
Beach.

Identify all 
projects and 
complete 
transactions

In Progress

The City amended its building code to clarify current 
wind-resistance specifications for façade elements and expects 
to launch a wind study in 2015.

Implement initial 
Building Code 
changes

Partially 
Completed

Completed

RETROFIT AS MANY BUILDINGS AS POSSIBLE SO THAT THEY WILL BE SIGNIFICANTLY  
MORE RESILIENT THAN THEY ARE TODAY

7

8

Encourage existing buildings 
in the 100-year floodplain to 
adopt flood resiliency 
measures through an 
incentive program and 
targeted requirements

Establish Community Design 
Centers to assist property 
owners in developing design 
solutions for reconstruction 
and retrofitting, and connect 
them to available City 
programs

In Progress

The City released a report Retrofitting Buildings for Flood Risk 
to offer guidance to building owners that are making resiliency 
investments. The City continues to seek funding for a building 
resiliency incentive program.

Implement code 
changes and 
launch incentive 
program

Partially 
Completed

Completed

In 2014, the City, in collaboration with Pratt University and other 
local partners, held a series of events in the Rockaways, 
Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Staten Island, and Canarsie to 
assist property owners in developing design solutions for 
reconstruction and retrofitting, insurance issues and provide an 
opportunity to connect with other related City programs.

Launch centers 
in targeted 
neighborhoods

Completed

321

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Milestone 
Status

Partially 
Completed

Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

9

10

11

12

13

14

1

2

3

4

Retrofit public housing units 
damaged by Sandy and 
increase future resiliency

In Progress  NYCHA has secured over $3 billion of FEMA funds to make 

resiliency investments across all of its Sandy-damaged 
developments. Design has begun for over 30 developments.

Install backup 
generators in 
vulnerable 
buildings; launch 
planning efforts 
for undamaged 
but vulnerable 
buildings

Launch sales tax abatement 
program for flood resiliency in 
industrial buildings

Completed

A sales tax abatement for flood resiliency in industrial buildings 
was approved by the IDA board in 2013, prioritizing 1-2 story 
buildings with at least 4 feet between their actual ground 
elevation and the applicable base flood elevation.

Launch program

Completed

Launch a competition to 
increase flood resiliency in 
building systems

In Progress  The City launched a competition and expects to award $30 
million to deploy innovative resiliency technologies to small 
business locations. In August 2014, RISE : NYC selected 27 
technologies as finalists in the program. These finalists had the 
opportunity to participate in a public Technology Demo Night on 
October 7, 2014. Following the Technology Demo Night, the 
RISE : NYC evaluation team expects to select winning 
proposals in early 2015.

Launch 
competition and 
select winners

Partially 
Completed

Clarify regulations relating to 
the retrofit of landmarked 
structures in the 100-year 
floodplain

Completed

In Progress

Amend the Building Code to 
improve wind resiliency for 
existing buildings and 
complete studies of potential 
retrofits 

The Landmarks Preservation Commission (LPC) has issued a 
Frequently Asked Questions guide about making changes to a 
landmarked building, particularly in regard to adding or 
relocating mechanical equipment for buildings in flood hazard 
areas. Additional flood resiliency guidance will be developed by 
LPC over time on a case-by-case basis as the outcomes of 
individual cases are determined.

The New York City building code has been amended to expand 
the existing DOB Façade Inspection Program to include rooftop 
structures and equipment. The New York City building code and 
the New York City mechanical code have been amended to 
strengthen provisions to prevent wind damage to certain 
buildings and building systems. The City is also in the process 
of launching a study of the impacts of future wind events on 
buildings.

Amend the Construction 
Codes and develop best 
practices to protect against 
utility service interruptions

Completed

In 2013, the City enacted several laws increasing protection 
against utility service interruptions. 

SUPPORT COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC RECOVERY IN IMPACTED AREA

Launch Business Recovery 
and Resiliency Programs

In Progress

The City is no longer pursuing the Business Resiliency 
Investment Program. In its place, the City, through SBS, will 
launch a new $3 million Business PREP program in 2015 to 
assist small businesses making resiliency investment and 
operational changes. 

Issue written 
guidance

Completed

Implement initial 
Building Code 
changes

Completed

Completed

Implement 
changes to 
Construction 
Codes

Launch program 
and begin 
disbursing funds

Partially 
Completed

Launch Neighborhood Game 
Changer Competition

Completed

The Neighborhood Game Changer competition has been 
discontinued and funds have been reallocated to more effective 
business resiliency programs and targeted resiliency 
investments that will improve local commercial corridors.

Issue RFP and 
select winning 
proposals

Launch Neighborhood Retail 
Recovery Program

In Progress  Last year, the Public Service Commission approved the NYC 

Superstorm Sandy Business Incentive Rate program. 

Support local merchants in 
improving and promoting 
local commercial corridors

In Progress

The City, through the SBS, is currently providing ongoing 
support to local merchants in Sandy-affected areas through 
capacity building, retail façade and streetscape improvements, 
and marketing/business attraction activities. The new Business 
PREP program will expand these services.

Launch Business 
Incentive Rate for 
retail and 
approve 
applications

Provide technical 
assistance and 
funding

Completed

Completed

Completed

322

S
G
N

I

D
L

I

U
B

Y
R
E
V
O
C
E
R

 

C

I

M
O
N
O
C
E

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

Completed

Completed

Y
R
E
V
O
C
E
R

 

C

I

M
O
N
O
C
E

E
C
N
A
R
U
S
N

I

5

6

Continue to support the 
FRESH program to increase 
the number of full-line 
grocers in underserved 
neighborhoods

Reassess commercial 
properties citywide to reflect 
post-Sandy market values

In Progress  The City continues to advance the FRESH program. Additional 

Completed

FRESH stores seeking benefits for new construction, expansion, 
and renovation have received approval and authorization. 
FRESH continues to pursue the most underserved 
neighborhoods throughout the city. 

For Fiscal Year 2014, DOF recognized Sandy’s impact by 
making downward adjustments to the market values of more 
than 88,000 properties. These adjustments led to tax reductions 
for more than 50,000 properties affected by the storm. For the 
Fiscal Year 2015 assessment roll, DOF inspected 5,400 
properties that had received physical reductions on the Fiscal 
Year 2014 roll in order to evaluate the current status of the 
properties. Market values for properties in the surge zones will 
remain at the Fiscal Year 2014 levels, unless the properties have 
been repaired or rebuilt.

Pursue FRESH 
programs in 
Sandy-impacted 
neighborhoods

Establish new 
market values 
and lower 
property taxes

TARGET AFFORDABILITY SOLUTIONS TO LOW-INCOME POLICYHOLDERS

1

Support Federal efforts to 
address affordability issues 
related to reform of the NFIP

In Progress  The City provided input on the Homeowners Flood Insurance 
Affordability Act of 2014, slowing the steep increases in flood 
insurance premiums. While the National Academy of Sciences 
affordability study is underway, the City is conducting its own 
affordability studies to better understand the impacts of recent 
reforms on New York City’s neighborhoods and residents. These 
studies are expected to be completed in 2015.

Complete 
affordability 
study

Partially 
Completed

DEFINE RESILIENCY STANDARDS FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS

2

3

Develop FEMA-endorsed 
flood protection standards 
and certifications for existing 
urban buildings

In Progress

In October 2014, the City released a report Retrofitting Buildings 
for Flood Risk to offer guidance to building owners that are 
making resiliency investments. This document aligns current 
building and zoning codes with new flood insurance regulations.

Partially 
Completed

Complete 
development of 
building 
standards and 
FEMA review

Call on FEMA to recognize 
mixed-use buildings as a 
distinct building category

In Progress

FEMA has recently updated its insurance policy form to allow 
applicants to indicate the percentage of a building that is used 
for commercial purposes. The City will continue to advocate for 
a distinct building category.

Create a 
mixed-use 
building category 
within the NFIP

Partially 
Completed

INCORPORATE RESILIENCY STANDARDS IN INSURANCE UNDERWRITING

4

5

Call on FEMA to develop 
mitigation credits for 
resiliency measures

In Progress

The City continues to advocate to FEMA for mitigation credits. 
The City is working closely with FEMA’s mitigation credits study 
and has offered extensive technical comments for FEMA’s 
consideration that better represents building types that 
withstand flood and mitigation approaches to reduce flood 
losses in dense, urban settings. It is anticipated that FEMA will 
complete its mitigation credits study in 2015.

Complete study 
of mitigation 
options and risk 
reduction

Partially 
Completed

Study approaches for New 
York City to join FEMA’s 
Community Rating System 
program

In Progress

FEMA is currently conducting a Community Assistance Visit, the 
first step before joining the Community Rating System (CRS). 
Based on the results of that visit, the City will evaluate its 
participation in the CRS.

Partially 
Completed

Complete study 
of City’s ability to 
be admitted to 
CRS program 
and cost-benefit 
analysis

EXPAND PRICING OPTIONS FOR POLICYHOLDERS

6

Call on FEMA to allow 
residential policyholders to 
select higher deductibles

In Progress

The City advocated and provided technical assistance for the 
Homeowners Flood Insurance Affordability Act of 2013, which 
includes a provision for the development of higher deductible 
policies. The City’s flood insurance affordability studies will 
evaluate the benefits of a higher deductible option.

Complete 
evaluation of 
higher deductible 
options

Partially 
Completed

323

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

E
C
N
A
R
U
S
N

I

S
E

I

T

I

L

I

T
U

IMPROVE AWARENESS AND EDUCATION ABOUT INSURANCE

7

8

9

Support the goals of the NYS 
2100 Commission to protect 
New York State, consumers, 
and businesses

Call on New York State to 
improve policyholder 
awareness at the point of 
sale or renewal

In Progress  The City continues to coordinate and support DFS with the 

implementation of its NYS 2100 Commission goals.

Support State 
efforts

Completed

In Progress

The City advocated and provided technical assistance for the 
Homeowners Flood Insurance Affordability Act of 2013, which 
included provisions regarding establishing an insurance 
advocate to support public outreach. In addition, the City has 
met with insurance associations to develop ways of improving 
point of sale communication. The City will continue to advocate 
for improved agent training by FEMA and will utilize its 
consumer education campaign to improve policyholder 
awareness.

Completed

Support State 
efforts to improve 
policyholder 
awareness

Launch a consumer 
education campaign on flood 
insurance

In Progress  The City continues to coordinate with the Center for New York 
City Neighborhoods on resources for the public around flood 
risk and flood insurance. This includes working closely with the 
Center on a flood risk website (floodhelpny.org). The City’s 
consumer education campaign will launch in Summer 2015.

Complete 
citywide 
campaign

Partially 
Completed

10

Launch an engagement 
campaign targeting insurers

In Progress

The City, in cooperation with DFS, has hosted a forum to 
engage private insurance companies to discuss flood products 
and mitigation strategies. The City continues outreach to 
insurers to discuss flood products and mitigation strategies.

Establish regular 
meetings with 
leading insurers

Partially 
Completed

REDESIGN THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK TO SUPPORT RESILIENCY

1

2

3

Work with utilities and 
regulators to develop a 
cost-effective system 
upgrade plan to address 
climate risks

In Progress ConEd continues to harden critical infrastructure under a 

PSC-approved program. In addition, $164 million worth of work 
is scheduled in 2016 and all work is scheduled to be completed 
by 2021. The PSC recently approved National Grid’s request for 
recovery of incremental capital costs for improvements in the 
Rockaway Peninsula that will increase system resiliency and 
replace leak-prone gas mains. The City is assessing LIPA’s 
storm hardening initiatives for the Rockaways and will provide 
testimony as to its adequacy in LIPA’s 2015 Rate Case. 

Completed

Incorporate 
cost-benefit 
analysis tool into 
regulatory 
framework

Work with utilities and 
regulators to reflect climate 
risks in system design and 
equipment standards

In Progress ConEd’s $1 billion storm hardening program was approved by 

the PSC and is currently underway across the City, which 
includes provisions to plan for climate risks based on the most 
recent NPCC climate projections. National Grid’s replacement of 
leak-prone pipe also addresses climate risks by reducing 
methane emissions. The City is assessing LIPA’s storm 
hardening initiatives for the Rockaways and will provide 
testimony as to its adequacy in LIPA’s 2015 Rate Case.

Completed

Submit 
comments to 
2014 NYISO 
Reliability Needs 
Assessment

Work with utilities and 
regulators to establish 
performance metrics for 
climate risk response

In Progress

The PSC introduced a statewide scorecard to measure utilities’ 
performance in preparation for, and restoration from, major 
outage events. There were no major storms in 2014, therefore 
the scorecard was not used.

Complete Con 
Edison rate case 
proceeding

Completed

HARDEN EXISTING INFRASTRUCTURE TO WITHSTAND CLIMATE EVENTS

4

5

Work with power suppliers 
and regulators to harden key 
power generators against 
flooding

In Progress Con Edison is proceeding with plans to harden generating 
facilities. Discussions are ongoing at the NYISO and at the 
Public Service Commission to develop potential compensation 
mechanisms for power suppliers. 

Launch effort 
with stakeholders

Completed

Work with utilities and the 
PSC to harden key electric 
transmission and distribution 
infrastructure against flooding

In Progress ConEd’s $1 billion storm hardening program was approved by 

the PSC and is currently underway across the City, which 
includes efforts to harden key electric transmission and 
distribution infrastructure against flooding. The City is assessing 
LIPA’s storm hardening initiatives for the Rockaways and will 
provide testimony as to its adequacy in LIPA’s 2015 Rate Case.

Complete Con 
Edison rate case 
proceeding

Completed

324

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Work with utilities and the 
PSC to harden vulnerable 
overhead lines against winds

Work with utilities, regulators, 
and gas pipeline operators to 
harden the natural gas 
system against flooding

In Progress ConEd’s $1 billion storm hardening program was approved by 

the PSC and is currently underway across the City, which 
includes efforts to underground a portion of its overhead wires 
and to employ other measures to increase the resiliency of 
overhead lines in high risk areas. In addition, the City completed 
and released a study in 2013 assessing the relative value and 
cost of selectively undergrounding power lines. The City is 
assessing LIPA’s storm hardening initiatives for the Rockaways, 
including overhead lines, and will provide testimony as to its 
adequacy in LIPA’s 2015 Rate Case.

In Progress ConEd’s $1 billion storm hardening program was approved by 

the PSC and is currently underway across the City, which 
includes provisions to accelerate replacement of leak prone 
pipe and harden tunnel head houses. National Grid has 
commenced a program in in the Rockaway Peninsula to make 
its gas system more resilient through accelerated replacement 
of leak-prone mains and installation of automated meters and 
other devices.

6

7

8

Milestone 
Status

Completed

Complete Con 
Edison rate case 
proceeding and 
Local Law 13 
study

Complete Con 
Edison rate case 
proceeding

Completed

Work with steam plant 
operators and the PSC to 
harden steam plants against 
flooding

In Progress ConEd’s $1 billion storm hardening program was approved by 

the PSC and is currently underway across the City, which 
includes efforts to harden steam plants against flooding.

Complete Con 
Edison rate case 
proceeding

Completed

S
E

I

T

I

L

I

T
U

RECONFIGURE UTILITY NETWORKS TO BE REDUNDANT AND RESILIENT

9

10

11

12

13

14

Work with industry partners, 
New York State, and 
regulators to strengthen New 
York City’s power supply

In Progress

Require more in-city plants to 
be able to restart quickly in 
the event of blackout

In Progress

The City continues to participate in proceedings at the NYISO 
and before the FERC to modify market rules to eliminate 
barriers to entry of new resources. The City also continues to 
participate in proceedings before the PSC related to relief of 
transmission congestion and support for renewable energy 
resources.

The City continues to work with the NYISO to ensure adequate 
blackstart capability to meet future contingencies. The City 
supported revisions to the NYISO’s tariffs that would maintain, 
as needed, the current complement of black start capable 
generating units within New York City. 

Continue 
ongoing power 
supply efforts

Completed

Continue 
ongoing efforts

Completed

Work with Con Edison and 
the PSC to develop a 
long-term resiliency plan for 
the electric distribution 
system

Work with utilities and 
regulators to minimize 
electric outages in areas not 
directly affected by climate 
impacts

Work with utilities and 
regulators to implement 
smart grid technology to 
assess system conditions in 
real time

Work with utilities and 
regulators to speed up 
service restoration for critical 
customers via system 
configuration

In Progress

The City continues to participate in the Reforming Energy Vision 
proceeding.

Complete Con 
Edison rate case 
proceeding

Completed

In Progress ConEd’s $1 billion storm hardening program was approved by 

the PSC and is currently underway across the City, which 
includes network reconfiguration in the Bowling Green and 
Fulton network areas. Other efforts include adding sectionalizers 
to reduce the number of customers affected by outages on the 
radial system, the addition of smart grid technologies, and the 
use of devices and equipment that allow for continuation of 
service and/or expeditious restoration of service following 
accidents, storm damage, or other events. 

Complete Con 
Edison rate case 
proceeding

Completed

In Progress ConEd is undertaking work to subdivide its network to limit the 

degree a system disruption in one area will have on adjacent 
areas.

Complete Con 
Edison rate case 
proceeding

Completed

In Progress ConEd’s $1 billion storm hardening program was approved by 

the PSC and is currently underway across the City, which 
includes efforts to install customer isolation switches to protect 
high tension network supply feeders.

Complete Con 
Edison rate case 
proceeding

Completed

325

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Work with utilities and 
regulators to speed up 
service restoration via 
pre-connections for mobile 
substations

Work with pipeline operators 
to expand and diversify 
natural gas supply

Work with utilities and 
regulators to strengthen the 
in-city gas transmission and 
distribution system

15

16

17

18

Initiative 
Status

In Progress

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

The PSC introduced a statewide Scorecard to measure utilities’ 
performance in preparation for, and restoration from, major 
outage events. There were no major storms in 2014, therefore 
the scorecard was not used.

Complete Con 
Edison rate case 
proceeding

Milestone 
Status

Completed

In Progress

The City continues to work with the PSC and the two delivery 
utilities to ensure a safe natural gas infrastructure supplying the 
five boroughs. 

Continue 
ongoing efforts

Completed

In Progress

The City continues to work with the PSC and our two delivery 
utilities to ensure a safe natural gas infrastructure supplying the 
five boroughs.

Complete Con 
Edison rate case 
proceeding

Completed

Launch energy infrastructure 
resiliency competition

In Progress

The City launched a competition and expects to award $30 
million to deploy innovative resiliency technologies to small 
business locations. In August 2014, RISE : NYC selected 27 
technologies as finalists in the program. The RISE : NYC 
evaluation team has selected winning proposals to be 
announced in Spring 2015.

Select winners of 
competition

Partially 
Completed

REDUCE ENERGY DEMAND

19

20

Work with utilities and 
regulators to expand citywide 
demand response programs

Work with government and 
private sector partners to 
expand the energy efficiency 
of buildings

S
E

I

T

I

L

I

T
U

In Progress

The City is working with the PSC, ConEd, and the NYISO to 
make the in-City demand response program more robust and to 
ensure continuity of such programs. 

Complete Con 
Edison rate case

Completed

Launch Green 
Light New York 
Center

Completed

In Progress

In September 2014, the City worked with government and 
private sector partners to release a ten-year citywide energy 
efficiency plan, One City: Built to Last. As part of this plan, the 
City committed to an 80% reduction in greenhouse gases by 
2050. To put New York City on this pathway, the City also set a 
30% reduction target for building emissions by 2025 and a 35% 
reduction target for government buildings by 2025. These 
targets will be met through leadership by example, resident 
empowerment to take action, high energy performance 
standards, equitable benefits to all neighborhoods, and 
approaches informed by data analysis and stakeholder 
feedback. The City is committing $1 billion to energy efficiency 
improvements in municipal buildings. The City is also launching 
a retrofit accelerator to assist the private sector in making these 
same investments.

DIVERSIFY CUSTOMER OPTIONS IN CASE OF UTILITY OUTAGE

21

22

23

Work with public and private 
partners to scale up 
distributed generation (DG) 
and micro-grids

In Progress

The City continues to participate in the Reforming Energy Vision 
proceeding, which includes efforts to support distributed 
generation and microgrids. The City is also working with ConEd 
and the PSC on revisions to ConEd’s standby tariffs that would 
lessen economic impediments to distributed generation, and is 
working with the PSC and NYSERDA on funding opportunities 
for distribute generation and micro-grids.

Launch 
micro-grid 
feasibility study

Completed

Incorporate resiliency into the 
design of City electric vehicle 
initiatives and pilot storage 
technologies

In Progress

The City continues to monitor the development of electric 
vehicle-to-grid / vehicle-to-building standards, which are still 
only in limited pilots nationally.

Improve backup generation 
for critical customers

In Progress

The City is currently finalizing the contracting for 45 mobile 
generator units. 

Continue 
ongoing efforts; 
implement and 
pilot at Brooklyn 
Army Terminal

Expand City 
emergency 
generator fleet by 
20 to 30 units

Completed

Partially 
Completed

326

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

SEEK TO HARDEN THE LIQUID FUELS SUPPLY INFRASTRUCTURE

1

2

3

4

5

Call on the Federal 
government to convene a 
regional working group to 
develop a fuel infrastructure 
hardening strategy

Develop a reporting 
framework for fuel 
infrastructure operators to 
support post-emergency 
restoration

Work with Buckeye and New 
York State to safely build 
pipeline booster stations in 
New York City to increase 
supply and withstand 
extreme weather events

Work with New York State to 
provide incentives for the 
hardening of gas stations to 
withstand extreme weather 
events

Ensure that a subset of gas 
stations and terminals have 
access to backup generators 
in case of widespread power 
outages

S
L
E
U
F

 

D

I

U
Q

I

L

In Progress Working closely with the Columbia University Center on Global 

Energy Policy, the City has convened relevant stakeholders, 
including Federal and State agencies, the National Petroleum 
Council, and private industry to discuss opportunities for a 
coordinated and regional liquid fuels infrastructure resiliency 
plan. A report will be released in October 2015. 

In Progress

The City, through NYCEDC, has developed a database of liquid 
fuel assets in the New York metropolitan region. NYCEDC 
expects to pilot this database with relevant governmental 
agencies and begin input of data with industry in 2015. 

In Progress

The City will continue to consider opportunities to safely ensure 
the supply of liquid fuels.

Completed

In 2013, New York State adopted into law a requirement that all 
gas stations within a half-mile of a major highway or evacuation 
route to build generator transfer switches and be able to source 
generators during a power outage. NYSERDA also offered 
incentives for generator transfer switches.

Assist in 
launching 
incentive 
program

Completed

In 2013, the State launched its FuelNY program, with gas 
stations meeting a certain criteria within a half-mile of a highway 
exit or hurricane evacuation route now required to have 
quick-connects for generators. 

Ensure creation 
of a generator 
pool and 
pre-event 
positioning plan

Develop regional 
strategy

Partially 
Completed

Ensure 
development of 
IT systems and 
information 
reporting 
framework

Ensure booster 
stations to 
withstand climate 
change impacts

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Not 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

ENHANCE THE ABILITY OF THE SUPPLY CHAIN TO RESPOND TO DISRUPTIONS

6

7

8

Explore the creation of a 
transportation fuel reserve to 
temporarily supply the private 
market during disruptions

In Progress

In Progress

Completed

Call on New York State to 
modify price gouging laws 
and allow flexibility of gas 
station supply contracts to 
increase fuel availability 
during disruptions

Develop a package of City, 
State, and Federal regulatory 
actions to address liquid fuel 
shortages during 
emergencies

The Federal government created a 22 million gallon gasoline 
fuel reserve in NY Harbor. The State created a 3 million gallon 
pilot gasoline fuel reserve on Long Island. For emergency diesel 
needs, fuel oil from the federal Home Heating Oil Reserve can 
be used, if appropriate emergency waivers are obtained. In 
2015, the City will continue to work to advocate for a fuel supply 
chain resiliency strategy for NYC, in partnership with State and 
industry partners, that will focus on protecting critical assets. 
The City will also explore funding for a Regional Resiliency 
Assessment Program with the U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security on the supply chain of fuels and other critical 
commodities.

The City continues to pursue regulatory opportunities to ensure 
the protection of consumers during fuel shortages following 
emergency events. This initiative can be carried out through 
legislation, or directly through executive action by the Governor 
and New York Attorney General, and will be included in the 
regulatory waiver playbook.

Evaluate 
feasibility and 
cost

Partially 
Completed

Secure passage 
of legislation

Partially 
Completed

The City, through OEM, is enhancing its playbook with a robust 
Citywide Emergency Fuel Operations Plan. This plan will provide 
a strategy for fueling priority vehicles and equipment in the 
event of a disruption to the supply chain. It will also include NY 
National Guard pre-scripted mission requests to provide site 
security. OEM anticipates completing the Citywide Emergency 
Fuel Operations Plan in 2015. 

Complete 
rationing plan 
and package of 
regulatory 
waivers

Completed

327

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

IMPROVE THE CITY’S ABILITY TO FUEL FIRST RESPONDERS AND PRIVATE CRITICAL FLEETS

Procure 
equipment

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Not 
Completed

Completed

Amend 
Construction 
Codes

Amend 
Construction 
Codes

Determine 
strategies and 
identify funding 
for each at-risk 
ED

9

Harden municipal fueling 
stations and enhance mobile 
fueling capability to support 
both City government and 
critical fleets

In Progress DCAS has ordered 35 fuel trucks. The pilot inspection unit has 
arrived and arrival of all units is expected by the end of 2015. 
DCAS is currently finalizing the contracting for 45 mobile 
generator units. DCAS has installed automated fuel tracking for 
all agencies except DSNY where installations will be completed 
by the end of 2015. 

ENSURE CRITICAL PROVIDERS’ OPERABILITY THROUGH REDUNDANCY AND  
THE PREVENTION OF PHYSICAL DAMAGE

Improve design and 
construction of new hospitals

Completed

The City has enacted several local laws to improve the design 
and construction of new hospitals in the floodplain.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

E
R
A
C
H
T
L
A
E
H

9

10

11

Require the retrofitting of 
existing hospitals in the 
500-year floodplain

Support the Health and 
Hospitals Corporation effort 
to protect public hospital 
emergency departments 
(EDs) from flooding

Improve the design and 
construction of new nursing 
homes and adult care 
facilities

Require the retrofitting of 
existing nursing homes in the 
100-year floodplain

Require the retrofitting of 
existing adult care facilities in 
the 100-year floodplain

Support nursing homes and 
adult care facilities with 
mitigation grants and loans

In Progress

The City will explore re-introducing legislation that would require 
retrofits to existing hospitals. 

In Progress  The City, through HHC, has secured nearly $1.7 billion in 

recovery and resiliency funding from FEMA to protect Bellevue, 
Metropolitan, Coler, and Coney Island Hospitals. Design for 
these projects will begin in 2015.

Completed

The City has enacted several local laws to improve the design 
and construction of new nursing homes and adult care facilities 
in the floodplain.

Amend 
Construction 
Codes

Completed

In Progress

The City will explore re-introducing legislation that would require 
retrofits to existing nursing homes. 

In Progress

The City will explore re-introducing legislation that would require 
retrofits to existing adult care facilities. 

In Progress

The City expects to receive approximately $19 million in FEMA 
funds for this initiative and will launch the nursing homes and 
adult care facility mitigation grants program upon approval by 
FEMA. 

Amend 
Construction 
Codes

Amend 
Construction 
Codes

Not 
Completed

Not 
Completed

Develop and 
launch program

Partially 
Completed

Increase the air conditioning 
capacity of nursing homes 
and adult care facilities

In Progress Prior efforts to advance this initiative have proven ineffective. The 
City will identify alternative mechanisms for achieving the goals of 
this proposal, and will explore using the nursing home and adult 
care facility mitigation grant program to advance this initiative.

Develop and 
launch program

Not 
Completed

REDUCE BARRIERS TO CARE DURING AND AFTER EMERGENCIES

Harden primary care and 
mental health clinics

Not Started

The City continues to pursue funding to complete this initiative.

Develop and 
launch program

Not 
Completed

Improve pharmacies’ power 
resiliency

In Progress

In 2014, DOHMH launched an emergency preparedness website 
for pharmacies and will continue to populate this site with 
helpful information to prepare for and respond to emergencies. 

Implement 
regulatory 
changes

Encourage 
telecommunications 
resiliency

In Progress

In 2014, DOHMH developed and distributed a City Health 
Information (CHI) publication dedicated to emergency 
preparedness for health providers. The CHI is an evidence-based 
clinical bulletin for healthcare providers throughout New York City. 
This was developed as a best practice guide w to help 
community-based providers understand the importance of 
telecommunications resiliency as well as the options they might 
consider and questions to ask when evaluating different solutions

Develop and 
distribute best 
practice guide

12

Encourage electronic health 
record-keeping

In Progress DOHMH’s Primary Care Information Project (PCIP) sponsors 
numerous initiatives to help primary care and mental health 
providers citywide with EHR technical assistance for their 
practices. In August 2014, DOHMH developed and distributed a 
City Health Information (CHI) for healthcare providers 
encouraging office preparedness as well as Electronic Health 
Records (EHRs) and telecommunication redundancy. 

Incorporate 
resiliency into 
EHR programs 
and conduct 
outreach

Completed

Completed

Completed

328

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

IMPROVE THE ABILITY OF COMMUNITIES TO PREPARE FOR AND RESPOND TO DISASTERS

S
S
E
N
D
E
R
A
P
E
R
P

 

Y
T

I

N
U
M
M
O
C

S
N
O

I

T
A
C

I

N
U
M
M
O
C
E
L
E
T

1

2

3

4

Launch pilot program to 
identify and address gaps in 
community capacity

Continue and Expand OEM’s 
Community Emergency 
Response Teams

Expand the Worker Connect 
information technology tool 
to serve as an Emergency 
Services Portal

Explore the creation of a new 
online Emergency Notification 
Contact System

In Progress  OEM continues to work with the FEMA Long Term Recovery 
Groups and other community based coalitions by attending 
meetings and organizing workshops. NYC Citizen Corps is 
developing a COOP training for CBOs and a Community 
Preparedness Toolkit for community organizations to better 
prepare and increase community capacity for emergencies. 
Both efforts are expected to be complete by the end of 2015.

In Progress  Working in concert with DoITT, OEM will distribute one 700 
megahertz radio to each CERT team throughout the city to 
ensure communication among teams during an emergency. 
OEM has also updated CERT curriculum to incorporate lessons 
learned from Hurricane Sandy. 

Not Started

The City continues to pursue funding to complete this initiative.

Not Started

The City continues to pursue funding to complete this initiative.

INCREASE ACCOUNTABILITY TO PROMOTE RESILIENCY

1

2

Establish an office within 
DoITT to focus on 
telecommunications 
regulation and resiliency 
planning

Establish new resiliency 
requirements for providers 
using scheduled renewals of 
the City’s franchise 
agreements

Completed

This office has been established at DoITT.

In Progress  The City has begun to review existing franchise agreements and 

commenced planning for framework of new resiliency 
requirements. A new public communications structure (PCS) 
franchise included resiliency and disaster recovery 
requirements. DoITT is developing a framework of new 
resiliency requirements for franchise renewals and continues to 
explore opportunities for incorporating resiliency and disaster 
recovery requirements in new franchises and contracts.

Complete pilot 
assessment

Partially 
Completed

Expand 
programs

Completed

Create new 
emergency 
services portal 
and strengthen 
functionality of 
Worker Connect

Begin to create 
voluntary 
database

Not 
Completed

Not 
Completed

Establish and 
operationalize 
new office

Completed

Establish 
framework of 
new resiliency 
requirements

Partially 
Completed

ENABLE RAPID RECOVERY AFTER EXTREME WEATHER EVENTS

3

Request business continuity 
plans from current City 
franchisees as permitted 
under existing franchise 
agreements

Completed

Business continuity plans have been requested and obtained. 
Planning for annual follow up meetings with franchisees is 
underway. Regular meetings with franchisees are ongoing.

Completed

Establish regular 
meetings with 
cell providers; 
develop criteria 
for hardening cell 
sites

HARDEN FACILITIES TO REDUCE WEATHER-RELATED IMPACTS

4

5

6

Develop flood protection 
standards for placement of 
telecommunications 
equipment in buildings

Use the DoITT franchise 
agreements to ensure 
hardening of all critical 
facilities

Work with cell providers to 
encourage hardening of cell 
sites

In Progress  The City has enacted several local laws to improve the design 

and construction of telecommunications infrastructure in 
buildings.

Implement 
programs

Partially 
Completed

In Progress  The City has begun to review franchisee’s hardening measures 

and plans for critical facilities, which includes site visits.

In Progress  The City conducts regular meetings with cell providers. 

Discussions of carriers’ plans and efforts for hardening cell sites 
are ongoing. DoITT will continue to encourage carriers to 
continue undertake hardening measures at cell sites and to 
assist in clearing any barriers to implementation within the City. 

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Audit critical 
facilities and 
provide guidance 
for hardening

Establish regular 
meetings with cell 
providers; develop 
criteria for 
hardening cell 
sites

329

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

S
N
O

I

T
A
C

I

N
U
M
M
O
C
E
L
E
T

N
O

I

T
A
T
R
O
P
S
N
A
R
T

CREATE REDUNDANCY TO REDUCE RISK OF OUTAGES

Study options to increase 
conduit infrastructure 
redundancy and resiliency

In Progress  The City conducts regular meetings with conduit infrastructure 

Launch study

providers; these are ongoing. DoITT will continue to explore 
further options, based on maps and information provided, for 
improving the availability and redundancy of conduit in the City. 

8

9

Continue implementation of 
ConnectNYC

Completed

The City completed all build-outs from contracts signed in 2014. 
Continued monitoring of active applications and applicant 
negotiations are ongoing with participating ISPs. 

Add telecommunications 
provider quality and resiliency 
to the WiredNYC and NYC 
Broadband Map ratings

Completed WiredNYC was officially launched on Sept. 30, 2014, which 

included the release of broadband infrastructure maps in NYC.

Complete 
second round of 
applications and 
begin installing 
fiber connections

Launch updated 
maps

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

PROTECT ASSETS TO MAINTAIN SYSTEM OPERATIONS

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Reconstruct and resurface 
key streets damaged by 
Sandy

In Progress  The City, through DOT, continues to resurface and reconstruct 

Sandy-damaged streets. As a result of Sandy damage, 
NYCDOT is reconstructing 33 lane miles at a cost of $114 
million and resurfacing 155 lane miles at a cost of $53 million.

Begin 
reconstruction 
and resurfacing

Completed

Integrate climate resiliency 
features into future capital 
projects

In Progress  The City, through DOT, is developing standard guidelines for 

incorporating resiliency features into street reconstruction 
projects. Bridge, Staten Island Ferry, and Traffic units have 
already initiated projects with climate resiliency features. 

Continue to 
develop standard 
guidelines 

Completed

Elevate traffic signals and 
provide backup electrical 
power

Protect NYCDOT tunnels in 
Lower Manhattan from 
flooding

Install watertight barriers to 
protect movable bridge 
machinery

In Progress  The foundations of traffic signals in flood prone areas are being 

Begin effort

Completed

raised through the installation of coastal storm foundations 
which will inherently raise control boxes as well. A total of 336 
coastal storm foundations will be installed in areas south of the 
Belt Parkway.

In Progress  The City, through DOT, has completed design for the 

Launch design

Completed

rehabilitation of the damaged electrical, mechanical and 
ventilation equipment for the Battery Park and West Street 
underpasses. Construction is anticipated to commence by 
Summer 2017. 

In Progress  The City, through DOT, has completed design for the 

Launch design

Completed

rehabilitation of the damages sustained to the electrical, and 
mechanical equipment for the 13 movable bridges. Several of 
these bridges will have the mechanical and electrical equipment 
raised and protected above flood levels.

Protect Staten Island Ferry 
and private ferry terminals 
from climate change-related 
threats

In Progress  The City, through DOT, will be implementing wet and dry 
flood-proofing protective measures at the St George and 
Whitehall terminals and at the Staten Island Ferry Maintenance 
Facility. 

Design underway Completed

Integrate resiliency into 
planning and project 
development

Call on non-City agencies to 
implement strategies to 
address climate change 
threats

In Progress  The City, through DOT, has already begun making resiliency a 

Begin effort

Completed

critical consideration in prioritizing capital projects. DOT is 
developing standard guidelines for incorporating resiliency 
features into street reconstruction projects. 

Completed

The City continues to coordinate with the MTA and Port 
Authority of New York & New Jersey in an effort to ensure 
greater coordination of resiliency investments.

Engage with 
non-City 
agencies

Completed

330

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

N
O

I

T
A
T
R
O
P
S
N
A
R
T

PREPARE THE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM TO RESTORE SERVICE AFTER EXTREME CLIMATE EVENTS

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

Plan for temporary transit 
services in the event of 
subway system suspensions

In Progress

The City, through DOT, has worked with OEM to draft a 
Transportation Playbook covering HOV restrictions, temporary 
transit services, bike/pedestrian facilities and other traffic 
management issues in an emergency situation.

Complete initial 
planning

Completed

Identify critical transportation 
network elements and 
improve transportation 
responses to major events 
through regular resiliency 
planning exercises

Develop standard plans for 
implementing High-
Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) 
requirements

Plan for and install new 
pedestrian and bicycle 
facilities to improve 
connectivity to key 
transportation hubs

Construct new ferry landings 
to support private ferry 
services

In Progress  DOT is working with other agencies to set up tabletop exercises 

to review the Transportation Playbook. One resiliency planning 
exercise has been held. DOT plans to hold further exercises 
with agency partners to increase its preparedness.

In Progress  DOT is planning to apply for federal funding to do further 
contingency planning to respond to future climate events.

In Progress  The City, through DOT, has worked with OEM to draft a 

Transportation Playbook covering HOV restrictions, temporary 
transit services, bike/ped facilities and other traffic management 
issues in an emergency situation. DOT continues to work with 
partner agencies to regularly update the formal plans. Citi Bike’s 
planned Phase II expansion will double the size of the bike 
share network to 12,000 bicycles and about 700 stations by the 
end of 2017. The expanded network will cover several 
neighborhoods that are vulnerable to weather-related 
transportation interruptions, including Red Hook, Greenpoint, 
and Long Island City. 

In Progress  The City will launch a new Citywide Ferry Service that will knit 

together existing East River routes with new landings and 
services to Astoria, the Rockaways, South Brooklyn, Soundview 
and the Lower East Side. Service will launch in 2017. Further 
expansion to Stapleton and Coney Island will constitute a 
second phase of expansion, pending additional funding. The 
project will include the construction of multiple new ferry 
landings.

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Complete initial 
planning, 
including multiple 
planning 
exercises and 
one live drill

Complete plan

Develop plan for 
improvements; 
begin 
implementation 
of most critical 
components

Identify locations 
and launch 
design

Completed

Deploy the Staten Island 
Ferry’s Austen Class vessels 
on the East River Ferry and 
during transportation 
disruptions

In Progress  DOT has secured an FTA Hurricane Sandy Competitive 

Resilience Grant, providing funds for two “flex landings,” which 
will be capable of handling Austen-class vessels and can be 
deployed at multiple locations, including East River terminals. 
Existing ferry landings at Hunters Point and East 34th Street will 
also be retrofitted to accommodate the New Generation Vessels 
also being procured as part of the FTA grant. 

Improve at all levels 
communications about the 
restoration of transportation 
services

In Progress  The City, through DOT, has worked with OEM to draft a 

Transportation Playbook covering HOV restrictions, temporary 
transit services, bike/ped facilities and other traffic management 
issues in an emergency situation. NYCDOT continues to work 
with partner agencies to regularly update the formal plans and 
improve communications. 

Complete 
operational plans 
for various types 
of deployment

Partially 
Completed

Put 
communications 
plan in place

Partially 
Completed

IMPLEMENT NEW AND EXPANDED SERVICES TO INCREASE SYSTEM FLEXIBILITY AND REDUNDANCY

16

17

18

Expand the city’s Select Bus 
Service network

In Progress  Seven SBS routes are currently in operation. Thirteen additional 

routes will be added by 2018 including the Woodhaven line 
which will service the Rockaways, a climate vulnerable area. 

Implement four 
SBS routes

Completed

Expand the network of bus 
priority strategies on arterial 
highways

Expand ferry services in 
locations citywide

In Progress  The City continues to pursue funding for this initiative. 

In Progress  The City will launch a new Citywide Ferry Service that will knit 

together existing East River routes with new landings and 
services to Astoria, the Rockaways, South Brooklyn, Soundview 
and the Lower East Side. Service will launch in 2017. Further 
expansion to Stapleton and Coney Island will constitute a 
second phase of expansion, pending additional funding.

Initiate planning 
for first highway 
priority corridor

Complete 
Citywide Ferry 
Study

Not 
Completed

Completed

331

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

ADAPT PARKS AND EXPAND GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE TO SHIELD ADJACENT COMMUNITIES FROM  
THE IMPACTS OF EXTREME WEATHER EVENTS

Restore city beaches

In Progress All City beaches were opened to the public in time for the 2013 
summer season and included new comfort stations to replace 
those damaged by Sandy. DPR continues to improve recreational 
opportunities and amenities at city beaches, including 
reconstruction of damaged boardwalks.

Engage 
community and 
begin design 
options

In Progress DPR, working with NYCEDC, has launched a new waterfront 

inspection program and is developing design guidelines for the 
flood zone to better enable parks to serve as a buffer for 
adjacent areas.

In Progress  DPR, working with NYCEDC, has launched a new waterfront 

inspection program and will use the results of those inspections 
to better manage its waterfront assets.

Complete 
preliminary 
design 
investigation for 
pilot

Inspect damaged 
bulkheads on 
parkland and 
develop plan

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

1

2

3

4

Harden or otherwise modify 
shoreline parks and adjacent 
roadways to protect adjacent 
community (See Coastal 
Protection Initiative 30)

Reinforce or redesign 
bulkheads in coastal parks 
(See Coastal Protection 
Initiative 6; see Coastal 
Protection Initiative 29)

Expand the City’s green 
streets plan, including for 
Jamaica Bay

In Progress  The City, through DPR and in partnership with ORR, secured a 

NFWF grant awarded to DPR for green Infrastructure in Brighton 
Beach. Issued RFP for engineering services.

Expand program 
to area around 
Jamaica Bay

Completed

RETROFIT OR HARDEN PARK FACILITIES TO WITHSTAND THE IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE

S
K
R
A
P

5

6

7

8

Fortify marinas and piers

In Progress  The City, through DPR, has secured FEMA funds to upgrade and 

Relocate or increase the 
resiliency of playgrounds and 
athletic fields

fortify the 79th Street Boat Basin, World’s Fair Marina, 
Sheepshead Bay Piers, Bayside Marina, Lemon Creek, 
Hammonds Cove, and Paerdegat Basin marinas.

In Progress  The City, through DPR, continues to assess and upgrade 

playgrounds and athletic fields in at-risk neighborhoods for 
increased resiliency. These include Tiffany Street Pier, Brigham 
Park, Lindower Baseball Field, Red Hook Baseball Field, Fort 
Washington, MacNeil Seawall, Rockaway Roller Hockey Rink, 
Sandpiper Playground, New Dorp Soccer Field, Manresa Field, 
Kaiser Park, and the Ocean Breeze Riding Area. 

Protect mechanical systems 
at major park facilities and 
buildings

In Progress  The City, through DPR will begin design in 2015 at Tony Dapolito 

Recreation Center and in 2015 will complete design for the 
Asser Levy Recreation Center boiler. As funding is made 
available, DPR will continue to assess and upgrade its facilities.

Move or protect critical 
operations centers

In Progress  At the Olmsted Center, DPR has completed procurement and 
begun construction of flood mitigation measures, including the 
incorporation of berms, stormwater detention areas, a flood 
gate, flood vents, concrete wall panels, tide gates, and elevation 
of the Annex. 

Complete 
preliminary 
design 
investigation

Complete 
preliminary 
design 
investigation

Complete 
preliminary 
design 
investigation

Begin to 
construct 
protective 
measures

PROTECT WETLANDS, OTHER NATURAL AREAS, AND THE URBAN FOREST

9

10

Work with the Federal 
government to transform 
Jamaica Bay

In Progress  The City continues to work with its Federal government partners 
and outside institutions to improve and transform Jamaica Bay. 
The General Management Plan was completed with a Record of 
Decision in Summer 2014. The Science and Resilience Institute 
at Jamaica Bay is developing a research and policy agenda and 
recently hired a new executive director to lead the scientific 
work in Jamaica Bay. 

Continue to 
advance 
partnership and 
launch 
transformation

Increase the health and 
resiliency of natural areas, 
including Tibbetts Brook

In Progress  The City, through DPR and in partnership with ORR, secured a 

NFWF grant for Tibbetts Brook. DPR will issue an RFP for 
daylighting Tibbetts Brook in 2015. Additionally, a final draft of 
the Alley Creek Watershed Plan was completed. A Bronx River 
fish passage was constructed and the first phase of a pilot 
stormwater capture program was completed at Shoelace Park.

Launch projects 
in Alley Creek 
and Bronx River 
watersheds and 
tidal wetlands in 
Staten Island, 
Bronx, and 
Queens

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

332

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Improve the health and 
resiliency of the city’s urban 
forest

11

12

Initiative 
Status

Completed

Initiative Status Description

The City, through DPR, has hired 20 foresters to improve the 
health and resiliency of the city’s urban forest. Tree Trust, through 
the City Parks Foundation, has expanded several hundred tree 
beds citywide this year. DPR will continue to increase pruning 
capacity and operations and expand tree beds.

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

Hire and train 10 
foresters

Completed

Increase growth of local plant 
material for restoration work

Completed

Production of beachgrass at Floyd Bennett Field has been 
completed for 2014. The grass was harvested at the end of 
2014 and will be made available for dune plantings. The 
production field will be replanted for the next growing season.

Launch 
improvements to 
Greenbelt Native 
Plants Center

Completed

S
K
R
A
P

N
O

I

T
A

I

D
E
M
E
R

 

D
N
A

 

N
O

I

T
C
E
T
O
R
P

 

L
A
T
N
E
M
N
O
R

I

V
N
E

DEVELOP TOOLS FOR COMPREHENSIVE CLIMATE ADAPTATION PLANNING AND DESIGN

13

14

15

16

Establish a center for 
resiliency and restoration 
efforts in the Jamaica 
Bay-Rockaway Parks

Completed

The Science and Resiliency Institute at Jamaica Bay launched in 
2013 with a scientific consortium led by CUNY. In 2014, the 
Institute played a key role in the City’s efforts to work with the 
USACE in Jamaica Bay. The Institute’s first executive director 
was hired in 2014.

Launch initial 
operations of 
center

Quantify the benefits of the 
city’s ecosystems and green 
infrastructure

In Progress  The City, through DPR, continued its work to quantify the 

benefits of green infrastructure, including stormwater retention, 
infiltration and sewer flow, evapotranspiration, and pollutant 
removal. 

Create climate adaptation 
plans for all parks in the 
100-year floodplain

In Progress  The City, through DPR, has mapped parks in the 100-year 

floodplain and continues to implement improvements based on 
its High-Performance Landscape Guidelines, which are currently 
being revised.

Commission 
studies on the 
impact of the 
city’s green 
infrastructure 
program

Map and 
catalogue 
vulnerable sites

Completed

Completed

Completed

Map the city’s overhead 
utilities and street trees

In Progress  The City, through DPR, has mapped its street trees and met 

with ConEd and looks forward to working with ConEd to 
complete the necessary analysis. 

Launch mapping 
effort

Completed

PROTECT SITES WITH HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES AND ENCOURAGE BROWNFIELD REDEVELOPMENT

1

2

3

4

5

Identify cost-effective 
measures to safeguard 
exposed substances in the 
100-year floodplain

Completed

The City’s Open Industrial Uses study was completed in 2014, 
identifying measures that can be undertaken to safeguard open 
industrial uses, including those in the floodplain.

Complete Open 
Industrial Uses 
study

Completed

Develop a catalogue of best 
practices for storing enclosed 
hazardous substances in the 
100-year floodplain

In Progress  Building on the results of the Open Industrial Uses Study, the 
City, through DCP, has launched a study to evaluate measures 
to improve resiliency in industrial zones. The study is expected 
to be completed in 2016. 

Begin process of 
developing best 
practices

Completed

Accelerate brownfield 
cleanup in the 100-year 
floodplain to prevent release 
of pollutants

Completed

To accelerate cleanup of flood-prone areas, OER expanded the 
NYC Brownfield Incentive Grant program to establish a new 
Climate Change Resilience Bonus Cleanup Grant with funding 
from the New York State Regional Economic Development 
Council and city sources, to provide up to $10,000 in bonus 
grants for cleanups in the NYC Voluntary Brownfield Cleanup 
Program in the 100-year floodplain.

Launch 
expansion of 
existing 
Brownfield 
Incentive Grant 
program

Explore strengthened cleanup 
standards on industrial 
waterfront brownfields

Launch brownfield climate 
change resiliency audits and 
improve storm preparedness

Completed OER established new regulations to strengthen standards for 

cleanup of waterfront industrial properties. The impact of future 
storms on communities in coastal industrial areas will be lessened 
by reducing the level of contaminants that can be left on 
waterfront brownfield sites, especially environmental justice 
neighborhoods that are already greatly overburdened by pollution.

Completed OER is now performing resiliency surveys at no charge for 

developers of brownfield sites in the Brownfield Cleanup 
Program. These surveys educate developers on the most 
protective building design practices to lower vulnerability to 
severe storms and other effects of climate change and on 
incentives to achieve these goals. After completing 
approximately 20 surveys, OER will publish a report on findings 
and best management practices to educate the broader 
development community. 

Examine existing 
soil cleanup 
standards and 
evaluate how to 
strengthen 
protections

Begin audits of 
brownfield 
cleanup and 
publish report 
findings

Completed

Completed

Completed

333

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City N
O

I

T
A

I

D
E
M
E
R

 

D
N
A

 

N
O

I

T
C
E
T
O
R
P

 
L
A
T
N
E
M
N
O
R

I

V
N
E

R
E
T
A
W
E
T
S
A
W

 

D
N
A

 

R
E
T
A
W

Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

6

7

Launch full operations of the 
NYC Clean Soil Bank

Perform update of SPEED, 
the City’s online 
environmental research 
engine

Completed OER was delegated authority to make solid waste beneficial use 

determinations by New York State and established the NYC 
Clean Soil Bank in 2013 to enable no-cost exchange of clean 
native soil from remediated brownfield sites to City construction 
projects, including those designed to elevate grades and 
promote climate change resiliency and new affordable housing 
projects. In its first six months of operation, the Clean Soil Bank 
enabled transfer of more than 67,000 tons of clean native soil 
and saved the City and brownfield developers more than $2.5 
million in soil disposal and purchase costs.

In Progress Subject to available funding, the City will expand the information 

available in SPEED to enable climate change resiliency 
analyses, and to improve the efficacy of its use before, during, 
and after future extreme weather. Using an existing State grant, 
OER also will establish an innovative IT application for use by 
community brownfield planners working to improve local 
brownfield cleanup, development, and resiliency efforts. In 2014 
OER worked to expand support for grass roots planning for 
climate resiliency by creating networks of community-based 
organizations. OER has established 15 new place-based 
Community Brownfield Planning Areas in communities in all five 
boroughs, including five new planning areas in neighborhoods 
heavily impacted by flooding from Sandy (Red Hook in 
Brooklyn, Edgemere in the Rockaways in Queens, Stapleton 
and West Shore on Staten Island, and East Harlem in 
Manhattan). 

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

Launch NYC 
Clean Soil Bank

Completed

Complete update 
to SPEED 
database

Completed

PROTECT WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES FROM STORM SURGE

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Adopt a wastewater facility 
design standard for storm 
surge and sea level rise

Completed

Harden pumping stations

In Progress

The City, through DEP, has adopted internal guidelines for 
wastewater facility design for storm surge and sea level rise. 
DEP will continue to implement these guidelines in new capital 
projects.

The City, through DEP, has secured $156 million in Federal 
funding to harden pumping stations and wastewater treatment 
plants. DEP will continue to incorporate resiliency measures in 
repairs and capital projects.

Harden wastewater treatment 
plants

In Progress

The City, through DEP, has secured $156 million in Federal 
funding to harden pumping stations and wastewater treatment 
plants. DEP will continue to incorporate resiliency measures in 
repairs and capital projects.

Adopt new 
design guidelines

Completed

Completed

Completed

Incorporate 
resiliency 
measures in 
repairs and 
capital projects

Incorporate 
resiliency 
measures in 
repairs and 
capital projects

Explore alternatives for the 
Rockaway Wastewater 
Treatment Plant

Develop cogeneration 
facilities at North River 
Wastewater Treatment Plant

Explore opportunities to 
expand cogeneration and 
other energy measures

Encourage regional resiliency 
planning

In Progress

The feasibility study is underway to explore alternatives for the 
Rockaway Wastewater Treatment Plan and is expected to be 
completed in 2015.

Initiate feasibility 
study

Completed

In Progress

Funding has been secured for the cogeneration facilities at 
North Rivers Wastewater Treatment Plant and the project is 
currently in design.

Completed

Substantially 
complete design 
of cogeneration 
facilities

In Progress

The Wards Island Wastewater Treatment Plants feasibility study 
is currently underway.

Initiate feasibility 
study

Completed

In Progress DEP helped organize a workshop at the February 2014 New 
York Water Environment Association annual conference on 
“Preparing for Climate Change Impacts to Wastewater 
Infrastructure in Coastal Communities.” DEP presented the NYC 
Wastewater Resiliency Plan and invited utilities from Nassau 
and Westchester counties to present on their resiliency projects. 
DEP will continue to present NYC’s wastewater resiliency 
approach as opportunities arise.

Completed

Share results of 
DEP’s detailed 
wastewater risk 
and adaptation 
analysis

334

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

IMPROVE AND EXPAND DRAINAGE INFRASTRUCTURE

8

9

10

11

12

R
E
T
A
W
E
T
S
A
W

 

D
N
A

 

R
E
T
A
W

Reduce combined sewer 
overflows with Green 
Infrastructure

In Progress DEP and partner agencies have initiated construction on 

multiple area-wide contracts covering approximately 27,000 
acres of the City. DEP is currently in construction or final design 
on approximately 2,000 bioswales and stormwater greenstreets. 
Consistent with the 2012 Amended CSO Consent Order, DEP 
has also completed and submitted four long-term control plans: 
Alley Creek/Little Neck Bay, Westchester Creek, Hutchinson 
River and Flushing Creek. DEP will continue to comply with the 
milestones set forth in the 2012 Amended CSO Consent Order.

Complete four 
long-term control 
plans

Completed

Reduce combined sewer 
overflows with high-level 
storm sewers citywide

In Progress 

In July 2014, DEP began construction of an $18 million Bluebelt 
and high level storm sewer project (HLSS) at Twin Ponds in the 
Laurelton area. DEP will construct two miles of high level storm 
sewers that will capture stormwater before it enters the 
combined sewer and divert it directly to the Twin Ponds 
Bluebelt. 

Begin or continue 
construction of 4 
high-level storm 
sewer capital 
projects

Continue to implement and 
accelerate investments in 
Bluebelts across the city

In Progress  DEP continues to build out the South Richmond Bluebelt. The 

Mid-Island Bluebelt construction is anticipated to begin in 2015.

Build out stormwater sewers 
in areas of Queens with 
limited drainage systems

In Progress  DEP is installing 84 catch basins and approximately 2.8 miles of 

new sewer lines in Springfield Gardens, Queens. As a 
component of this project, stormwater from the surrounding 
area has been redirected into a newly constructed wetland 
conveyance system as part of the Springfield Lake Bluebelt 
initiative, and now makes its way through Springfield Lake. In 
2015, DEP will complete construction of the fourth phase of a 
$175 million project to improve drainage in Springfield Gardens, 
Queens.

Continue build 
out of South 
Richmond 
Bluebelt and 
begin 
construction of 
Mid-Island 
Bluebelt

Begin or continue 
construction of 
three storm 
sewer build-out 
capital projects

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Periodically review rainfall 
trends and implications for 
stormwater infrastructure

Completed

The latest assessment of precipitation data was completed and 
featured in the NYC Wastewater Resiliency Plan.

Create process 
to reassess 
precipitation data

Completed

PROMOTE REDUNDANCY AND FLEXIBILITY TO ENSURE CONSTANT SUPPLY OF HIGH-QUALITY WATER

13

14

15

Repair the leak in the 
Delaware Aqueduct

In Progress

The construction of the access shafts is underway. The project 
is currently on schedule to for completion in 2016.

Improve interconnection 
between the Catskill and 
Delaware aqueducts and 
maximize capacity to deliver 
water from the Catskill/
Delaware system

Continue the Watershed 
Protection Program to 
maintain drinking water 
quality

In Progress  Construction contracts are currently being procured. 

In Progress DEP continues to implement the watershed protection program, 

including the land acquisition program. 

Continue 
construction of 
bypass tunnel

Begin 
construction of 
inter-connection

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Incorporate 
updates to 
Long-Term 
Watershed 
Protection 
Program

335

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

IDENTIFY AND HARDEN CRITICAL FOOD DISTRIBUTION ASSETS

1

2

Study the food distribution 
system to identify other 
prospective vulnerabilities

Expand upon prior energy 
studies, to explore options 
for cost-effective, continuous 
power for the Hunts Point 
Food Distribution Center

In Progress

The City is in the process of procuring a consultant to assist in a 
food system resiliency study. This study is expected to be 
completed in 2016.

Launch study

Completed

In Progress

The study has been completed and will inform ongoing energy 
resiliency work in Hunts Point.

Expand current 
study

Completed

IMPROVE THE RESILIENCY OF CONSUMER ACCESS

3

4

5

6

7

Call on New York State to 
issue preparedness 
guidelines to retailers in 
anticipation of extreme 
weather events

Call on the State legislature 
to pass City-sponsored 
legislation mandating electric 
generators for food retailers

Continue to support the 
FRESH program to increase 
the number of full-line 
grocers in underserved 
neighborhoods

Expand DCAS food 
procurement pilots towards 
contracts with larger, more 
resilient distributors that have 
active New York operations

Implement preparedness 
measures for continued 
availability of SNAP benefits 
for vulnerable consumers 
following large-scale power 
outages

Completed

The City, in cooperation with the State, has drafted and released 
preparedness guidelines.

Completed

Disseminate 
State-issued 
preparedness 
guidelines

In Progress

Legislation was introduced and has stalled at the State level. 
OEM will explore other options. 

Advance 
legislation

Completed

In Progress

The City continues to advance the FRESH program. Additional 
FRESH stores seeking benefits for new construction, expansion 
and renovation have received approval and authorization. 
FRESH continues to pursue the most underserved 
neighborhoods throughout the city. 

Pursue FRESH 
programs in 
Sandy-impacted 
neighborhoods

Completed

Completed DCAS has registered a contract with Garner Environmental 

Services effective July 1, 2014 which provides for emergency 
procurement and delivery of meals ready to eat, other food 
products, and mass feeding services in response to emergency 
conditions.

Completed

This initiative is completed. Waivers for immediate submissions 
have been completed.

PROTECT SOLID WASTE FACILITIES AND DISPOSAL NETWORKS

Harden critical City-owned 
facilities

In Progress 

In 2014, DSNY completed flood mitigation assessments of six 
major facilities -- the Manhattan Borough Repair Shop, the 
Manhattan District 3 Garage on Pier 36, a DSNY-owned office 
building at 44 Beaver Street, the Brooklyn 11 District Garage, 
the DSNY general supply warehouse in Greenpoint and the 
Bronx 12 District Garage. As a result of these assessments, 
DSNY has developed mitigation project proposals that will be 
included in future facility capital upgrades. DSNY will continue 
to Incorporate resiliency measures in repairs and capital 
projects as appropriate.

1

2

Work with third-party owners 
to protect critical assets and 
networks

In Progress  All long-term refuse and recycling vendors have taken steps to 
reduce vulnerability to coastal flooding. In addition, DSNY has 
identified and catalogued potential system vulnerabilities, 
including those in the region’s transportation network, that could 
pose a threat to the City’s solid waste management system and 
developed contingencies to operate in the case of an 
emergency.

Develop an 
inventory of 
critical system 
vulnerabilities 
and catalogue 
known risks

Completed

336

Begin expansion 
of suppliers

Completed

Completed

Prepare waiver 
for immediate 
submission if 
necessary

Completed

Incorporate 
resiliency 
measures in 
repairs and 
capital projects

Y
L
P
P
U
S

 

D
O
O
F

E
T
S
A
W

 

D

I

L
O
S

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City 1

2

3

4

5

Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

COASTAL PROTECTION

In Progress

The City continues to work with the Port Authority on coastal 
protection measures in Red Hook, as part of the City’s efforts to 
implement an integrated flood protection system.

Complete study 
and launch pilot 
measures

Partially 
Completed

Work with the Port Authority 
to continue a study of 
innovative coastal protection 
measures using clean dredge 
material in Southwest 
Brooklyn

Call on and work with the 
USACE to develop an 
implementation plan and 
preliminary designs for a local 
storm surge barrier along the 
Gowanus Canal

 Implement strategies to 
protect Brooklyn Bridge Park 
and DUMBO

In Progress

The City has launched a feasibility study for a Gowanus Canal 
local storm surge barrier.

In Progress Construction of the John Street section of the Park is nearing 

completion. A developer has been designated and construction 
of the development site is expected to be completed in 2016.

T
N
O
R
F
R
E
T
A
W

 

S
N
E
E
U
Q
-
N
Y
L
K
O
O
R
B

Support private investments 
that reduce flood risk along 
Newtown Creek

In Progress

The City expects to serve businesses along Newtown Creek 
through its new Business PREP program, which will launch in 
2015.

Create an implementation 
plan for comprehensive 
flood-protection 
improvements on public and 
private property along the 
Williamsburg, Greenpoint, and 
Long Island City coastlines

In Progress

The City will continue to work with the USACE to advance 
projects in vulnerable locations citywide, including the 
Williamsburg, Greenpoint, and Long Island City coastlines. As 
new waterfront development occurs, the City looks to leverage 
opportunities created by new construction to advance flood 
protection.

BUILDINGS

6

Implement planned upgrades 
to vulnerable City-owned, 
industrial properties

In Progress

The City is implementing upgrades to City-owned industrial 
properties including electrical equipment elevation at Brooklyn 
Army Terminal and Bush Terminal.

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Complete 
preliminary 
feasibility study 
and design and 
launch USACE 
study

Begin construction 
of the John St. 
section of the 
park; designate 
developer for John 
St. lower site; 
complete study of 
DUMBO resiliency 
measures

Advertise 
support to 
businesses; 
provide technical 
assistance

Commence 
study

Completed

Completed

Commence 
property 
upgrades and 
substantially 
complete

CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

7

8

9

Improve connections 
between Red Hook and the 
rest of Brooklyn

Completed DOT has completed work at this location to allow a better flow 

of pedestrian traffic and public transit at this location. 
Enhancements to Mill Street connection and BQE underpass 
are complete.

Completed

Complete 
enhancements to 
Mill street 
connection and 
BQE underpass

Call for the MTA to explore 
Red Hook-Lower Manhattan 
bus connections

 Implement expanded free 
summer weekend ferry 
service from Manhattan to 
Red Hook in 2013

In Progress

The City will launch a new Citywide Ferry Service that will 
include Red Hook. Service will launch in 2017. 

Complete 
assessment

Partially 
Completed

Completed

The City will launch a new Citywide Ferry Service that will 
include Red Hook. Service will launch in 2017. 

Completed

Complete 
summer 2013 
service and 
evaluate results

337

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

 

S
N
E
E
U
Q
-
N
Y
L
K
O
O
R
B

T
N
O
R
F
R
E
T
A
W

D
N
A
L
S

I

 

N
E
T
A
T
S

 

F
O

 

S
E
R
O
H
S

 

H
T
U
O
S

 

D
N
A

 

T
S
A
E

COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC RECOVERY

10

11

Create and implement a 
revitalization strategy for 
targeted retail and community 
spaces within Red Hook 
Houses

Implement planned and 
ongoing investments by the 
City and private partners

COASTAL PROTECTION

Not Started

The City continues to pursue funding to begin this work.

Complete 
assessment

Not 
Completed

In Progress

The City continues to implement investments to increase 
resiliency along the Brooklyn-Queens Waterfront.

Complete first 
phase of Bush 
Terminal Park

Completed

1

Call on and work with the 
USACE to study the 
construction of a floodgate at 
Mill Creek

In Progress

The City will continue to work with the USACE on its South 
Shore phase 2 feasibility study and possibly through its CAP 
program to advance projects in vulnerable locations along the 
South Shore, including at Mill Creek. 

Commence 
study

Completed

BUILDINGS

2

Assist Staten Island 
University Hospital (SIUH) in 
applying for hazard mitigation 
funding

Completed

The City committed $28 million to both SIUH campuses to 
upgrade the facilities against future climate risks. Prior to this, 
the City provided technical assistance to SIUH in submitting 
their HMGP grant application to the State for HMGP funding, 
resulting in a State award of $12M in HMGP funding to protect 
critical infrastructure at the North Campus. 

Provide technical 
support to SIUH

Completed

CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

3

4

Implement and expedite 
roadway and sewer capital 
projects along Hylan 
Boulevard, especially in 
vulnerable South Shore areas

Call on and work with the 
MTA to create an 
implementation plan for the 
relocation of Richmond Valley 
SIR station to Page Avenue

In Progress  NYCDOT is currently working on 13 street reconstruction 

projects in the South Shore areas.

In Progress  The City has called on the MTA to secure funding for this study.

Commence 
sewer 
enhancement 
and paving 
projects; 
complete 
intersection 
improvements

Commence 
relocation 
feasibility study

Partially 
Completed

Not 
Completed

338

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

Completed

5

6

7

8

Study potential new ferry 
routes serving Staten Island 
and issue a Request for 
Expressions of Interest (RFEI) 
to gauge market interest

In Progress  NYCEDC is working to lease City-owned land adjacent to the 

planned New York Wheel and Empire Outlets development for a 
ferry landing to serve smaller vessels coming from various 
locations across the harbor. In addition, further expansion to 
Stapleton could constitute a second phase of expansion in the 
recently announced Citywide Ferry Service, subject to the 
availability of additional funding. Ferry Service to all boroughs was 
examined in NYCEDC’s Comprehensive Citywide Ferry Study.

Commence 
Comprehensive 
Citywide Ferry 
Study

Secure available Federal 
funding to implement the 
Community Wildfire 
Protection Plan for fire-prone 
areas on the East Shore

Launch the first capital 
project for the Mid-Island 
Bluebelt in Midland Beach

Explore expansion of the 
City’s mitigation banking pilot 
as a funding mechanism to 
facilitate the construction of 
the Mid-Island and South 
Shore Bluebelts

In Progress

The City, through DPR, continues to seek funds for this initiative. Apply for relevant 

Completed

In Progress  Construction of the first capital project for the Mid-Island 

Bluebelt in Midland Beach is projected to start in 2015.

Not Started Upon successful demonstration of the Saw Mill Creek mitigation 

banking pilot, the City will explore expanding mitigation banks 
to other locations citywide.

funding

Finalize 
Environmental 
Impact 
Statement; obtain 
all necessary 
permits; begin 
property 
acquisition

Develop pilot 
mitigation 
banking structure

Completed

Completed

COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC RECOVERY

9

10

11

12

Issue a Request for 
Expressions of Interest (RFEI) 
for new concessions and 
services at City-controlled 
beaches in the East Shore

Create a comprehensive 
revitalization plan for Great 
Kills Harbor to increase 
resiliency and to draw 
additional investment

Create a strategic plan for public 
recreational land, including the 
beachfront recreation areas and 
open space

Implement planned and 
ongoing investments by the 
City and private partners

COASTAL PROTECTION

1

2

Call for USACE to develop an 
implementation plan to 
mitigate inundation risks 
through Rockaway Inlet, 
exploring a surge barrier and 
alternative measures

Develop an implementation 
plan to address frequent tidal 
inundation in Broad Channel 
and Hamilton Beach, 
incorporating international 
best practices

Completed

An RFEI for concessions on City-controlled beachfront issued in 
2014 yielded several activations over the summer including: 
Staten Island Beach Fest; 7 weekends of programming and 
activations at Midland Beach, and; Fantasy Shore Amusement 
Park at Midland Beach and the Sunset Festival.

Issue RFEI; 
activities subject 
to RFEI response

Completed

In Progress  The City submitted an application to NFWF for this project but 

Complete plan

was not awarded funding. The City will continue to identify 
possible funding alternatives for this initiative. 

In Progress As part of a strategic East Shore planning exercise, DPR 

Complete plan

anticipates leading a conceptual recreation planning process for 
the East Shore of Staten Island in 2015.

In Progress  Ocean Breeze construction is ongoing. The New Stapleton 
Waterfront construction commenced in early 2014 and is on 
schedule for 2016 completion. A Brielle Avenue developer was 
selected and is a preparing ULURP application.

Complete Ocean 
Breeze track and 
field athletic 
complex; select 
respondent for 
Brielle Avenue 
municipal site

Not 
Completed

Not 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

In Progress

The City continues to work with the USACE through the 
Rockaway Reformulation study to evaluate a Rockaway Inlet 
storm surge barrier that would reduce risk, as part of a 
comprehensive strategy, in all vulnerable neighborhoods 
surrounding Jamaica Bay.

Launch study

Completed

In Progress

The City continues to evaluate resiliency options in Broad 
Channel through DCP’s Resilient Neighborhoods study.

Complete study

Partially 
Completed

339

D
N
A
L
S

I

 

N
E
T
A
T
S

 

F
O

 

S
E
R
O
H
S

 

H
T
U
O
S

 

D
N
A

 

T
S
A
E

S
N
E
E
U
Q

 

H
T
U
O
S

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

3

Complete short-term dune 
improvements on the 
Rockaway Peninsula

In Progress Short-term dune improvements were completed in 2014. The 

City continues to work with the USACE on its Rockaway 
Reformulation Study. Investment options on the beach and in 
Jamaica Bay are currently being evaluated, with final selection 
of preferred alternatives expected in 2015.

BUILDINGS

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

Complete dune 
improvements

Completed

4

Complete design competition 
to enhance resiliency of 
planned Arverne East Project

Completed

The winners of the Arverne East resiliency enhancement design 
competition were announced in October 2013 and the City is 
working with the developer and winning team to pursue 
implementation.

Complete 
competition and 
announce winning 
submission

Completed

CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

5

6

Build a new multi-specialty 
ambulatory surgical center on 
the Rockaway Peninsula

In Progress  NYCEDC sold the Rockaway Courthouse to a private developer 

in March 2015. The site will be renovated and reopened as a 
medical center, providing new health care services to the 
Rockaways.

Expand ferry service to the 
Rockaway Peninsula

In Progress  The City will launch a new Citywide Ferry Service that will knit 

together existing East River routes with new landings and 
services to Astoria, the Rockaways, South Brooklyn, Soundview 
and the Lower East Side. Service will launch in 2017. 

COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC RECOVERY

Get New Yorkers “Back to 
the Beach” for summer 2013

Completed  All City beaches were opened to the public in time for the 2013 

season and included new comfort stations to replace those 
damaged by Sandy. DPR continues to improve recreational 
opportunities and amenities at city beaches.

Explore opportunities for 
long-term activation of the 
beachfront

In Progress  The City continues to prioritize funding for the Rockaway Parks 

Conceptual plan and is continuing to rebuild the Rockaway 
boardwalk. 

Develop a revitalization 
strategy for the Beach 108th 
Street corridor

In Progress  The City continues to foster the revitalization of the Rockaway 

Peninsula through investments such as the upcoming launch of 
Citywide Ferry Service as well as pursuing funding 
opportunities, jointly with the State, for targeted infrastructure 
and resiliency improvements in key commercial corridors 
throughout the Rockaways, including Beach 108th Street, 
Beach 116th Street, Mott Avenue, and surrounding business 
districts. 

With private 
developer, 
complete center 
and make 
operational

Construct flexible 
ferry infrastructure; 
commence 
comprehensive 
Citywide Ferry Study

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Complete 
summer 2013 
beach programs; 
complete 
near-term 
restoration of the 
boardwalk

Continue to 
address 
substantially 
damaged areas of 
boardwalk; 
explore options 
for new 
beachfront 
destinations issue; 
RFEI for cultural 
programming 
partners

Complete 
strategy

Partially 
Completed

Develop a comprehensive 
commercial revitalization plan 
for Beach 116th Street

Develop a commercial 
revitalization strategy for Far 
Rockaway, potentially 
involving repositioning of 
City- and MTA-controlled 
sites

In Progress  The City continues to foster the revitalization of the Rockaway 

Complete plan

Partially 
Completed

Peninsula through investments such as the upcoming launch of 
Citywide Ferry Service as well as pursuing funding opportunities, 
jointly with the State, for targeted infrastructure and resiliency 
improvements in key commercial corridors throughout the 
Rockaways, including Beach 108th Street, Beach 116th Street, 
Mott Avenue, and surrounding business districts. 

In Progress  The Urban Land Institute’s Technical Assistance Panel report 

was completed. Beach 20th Street Plaza design has been 
finalized and construction is expected to be completed in 2015. 

Partially 
Completed

Complete plan; 
issue RFP for 
NYC/DOT/MTA 
controlled sites; 
complete Beach 
20th Street plaza

340

S
N
E
E
U
Q

 

H
T
U
O
S

7

8

9

10

11

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City S
N
E
E
U
Q

 

H
T
U
O
S

N
Y
L
K
O
O
R
B

 

N
R
E
H
T
U
O
S

Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Launch a satellite Workforce1 
Career Center in Far 
Rockaway

Initiative 
Status

Completed

Initiative Status Description

A Workforce1 Career Center satellite launched in Far Rockaway 
in August 2013. SBS released an RFP for the Far Rockaway 
Economic Advancement Initiative in 2014. In addition, SBS, in 
collaboration with NYCHA, CEO, and Citi Community 
Development, is also launching a $1.1 million investment to 
expand place-based economic empowerment and mobility and 
connect Far Rockaway residents to high-quality, full-time 
employment. 

Implement planned and 
ongoing investments by the 
City and private partners

In Progress  The City continues to implement investments to increase 

resiliency in South Queens.

12

13

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

Complete and 
open Center

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Launch Jamaica 
Bay/Rockaway 
Restoration 
Corps, complete 
Beach 73rd 
Street YMCA

Launch study

Completed

Launch study

Completed

COASTAL PROTECTION

1

2

3

4

5

Call on and work with the 
USACE to study additional 
Sea Gate oceanfront 
protections

Continue to work with the 
USACE to study 
strengthening the Coney 
Island/Brighton Beach 
nourishment

 Call on and work with the 
USACE to study Manhattan 
Beach oceanfront protections

Call on and work with the 
USACE to study mitigating 
inundation risks through 
Rockaway Inlet, exploring a 
surge barrier and alternative 
measures

Develop an implementation 
plan and preliminary designs 
for new Coney Island Creek 
wetlands and tidal barrier

BUILDINGS

In Progress

The City will continue to work with the USACE on its NY Harbor 
study to advance projects in vulnerable locations citywide, 
including Sea Gate. Bulkheads will be improved in Sea Gate 
with State funds.

In Progress

The City will continue to work with the USACE on its NY Harbor 
study to advance projects in vulnerable locations citywide, 
including Coney Island and Brighton Beach.

In Progress

The City will continue to work with the USACE on its NY Harbor 
study to advance projects in vulnerable locations citywide, 
including Manhattan Beach.

Launch study

Completed

In Progress

The City continues to work with the USACE through the 
Rockaway Reformulation study to evaluate a Rockaway Inlet 
storm surge barrier that would reduce risk, as part of a 
comprehensive strategy, in all vulnerable neighborhoods 
surrounding Jamaica Bay.

In Progress  The City has launched a feasibility study for a Coney Island 

Creek tidal barrier.

Launch study

Completed

Partially 
Completed

Complete 
preliminary 
feasibility study 
and design and 
identify next 
steps

6

Study additional resiliency 
initiatives for ground-floor 
housing within NYCHA 
buildings

In Progress NYCHA has assessed 1007 ground/first floor apartments in 
approximately 250 Sandy damaged buildings. Design of dry 
flood proofing measures has commenced. NYCHA will continue 
to develop plans to protect ground/first floor apartments with 
FEMA funding. 

Complete 
outreach process 
and study

Partially 
Completed

CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

7

8

9

Support CUNY launch of 
study and pilot of new 
technologies for high-rise 
buildings

Study options to ensure 
resiliency of private 
cogeneration facilities in the 
area

Construct new Coney Island 
Hospital outpatient clinic to 
replace the destroyed Ida G. 
Israel facility

Not Started

The City will support CUNY in its efforts.

Not Started

In 2014, the City explored, with stakeholders in Southern 
Brooklyn, opportunities to develop cogeneration facilities. The 
City will continue to pursue future cogeneration opportunities 
and work to secure funding for any necessary studies. 

CUNY to identify 
site and launch 
study and pilot

Not 
Completed

Launch study

Not 
Completed

In Progress HHC is building a temporary clinic on an HPD site near the 

former Ida G. Israel facility. HHC is still searching for a suitable 
permanent site.

Open interim 
facility

Partially 
Completed

341

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

10

11

12

13

Call for the USACE to 
develop an implementation 
plan for the reinforcement of 
existing Belt Parkway edge 
protections

Restore recreational 
infrastructure along Southern 
Brooklyn Beaches

In Progress  The City will continue to work with the USACE on its NY Harbor 

Complete study

study to advance projects in vulnerable locations citywide, 
including along the Belt Parkway

In Progress  DPR continues to restore recreational infrastructure along 

Southern Brooklyn beaches.

Complete planned drainage 
improvements in Coney 
Island to mitigate flooding

In Progress

Provide technical assistance 
to support Sea Gate in 
repairing Sandy-damaged 
infrastructure

In Progress

The first capital project in Coney Island is currently in 
construction. The project includes the installation of a new 
larger outfall at West 15th Street, new storm sewers, 
replacement of existing sanitary sewers, replacement and 
upgrading of existing trunk and distribution water mains in West 
15th Street between Hart Place and Surf avenue, as well as the 
replacement of existing storm sewers in a portion of Surf 
Avenue between Stillwell and West 17th Streets. 

The City is in conversations with Sea Gate leadership on 
opportunities to assist its infrastructure repairs and is working 
actively with the USACE to complete coastal protections in Sea 
Gate. The City will continue to work with Sea Gate Association 
to study private infrastructure and prepare scope for repairs.

Milestone 
Status

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Completed

Complete 
restoration of 
infrastructure and 
facilities

Commence first 
phases of 
construction and 
advance design 
for future phases

Partially 
Completed

Work with Sea 
Gate Association 
to study private 
infrastructure and 
prepare scope 
for repairs

N
Y
L
K
O
O
R
B

 

N
R
E
H
T
U
O
S

COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC RECOVERY

14

15

16

17

Work with Brooklyn Chamber 
of Commerce to assist in 
organizing Sheepshead Bay 
businesses

Support area recovery 
through the rebuilding and 
expansion of the 
entertainment district

Study opportunities along 
Coney Island Creek to 
generate economic activity and 
facilitate resiliency investments

Implement planned and 
ongoing investments by the 
City and private partners

In Progress Sheepshead Bay neighborhood was not eligible for AvenueNYC 

funding, as it is not low to moderate-income, thus Brooklyn 
Alliance did not apply for funding. 

Assist local 
merchant 
organizing efforts

Not 
Completed

In Progress  The Coney Island entertainment district had a historic season in 
2014, attracting millions of visitors. The new roller coaster—the 
Thunderbolt—opened in June to great acclaim, and the Aquarium 
commenced work on their Ocean Wonders expansion project, as 
planned, and received key approvals from FEMA for major repair 
efforts for damage from Sandy. Further investments in the Coney 
Island entertainment district, including new rides and attractions, 
are planned by private operators and developers in area. The City 
will continue to support the Aquarium expansion including 
completion of the Ocean Wonders expansion project which is 
anticipated to be completed in 2016.

In Progress  The City has launched a feasibility study for a Coney Island 

Creek tidal barrier. As part of that study, NYCEDC continues to 
seek feedback from local stakeholders on related economic 
development opportunities.

In Progress  There have been continued investments over the past year in 
Coney Island’s recreational and amusement attractions. NYC 
Parks Department has continued to progress renovations at 
Calvert Vaux Park. A second phase of the West 8th Street 
Access Project is under construction, further improving 
pedestrian connections from the subway station to the 
Boardwalk via a new plaza at West 10th Street. Construction will 
soon commence on the Seaside Park and Community Arts 
Center project, which will bring new open space and a cultural 
attraction to a long-neglected landmark building on the 
Boardwalk at West 21st Street. The City continues to work with 
private partners to advance the revitalization of the Coney 
Island’s entertainment district, building on last years’ opening of 
a state-of-the-art roller coaster and including progress on major 
efforts such as the expansion of the New York Aquarium.

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Partially 
Completed

Complete phase 
5 of amusement 
area expansion 
with new roller 
coaster; 
commence 
Aquarium 
expansion

Complete study 
of economic 
development 
opportunities

Complete Calvert 
Vaux Park fields; 
West 8th Street 
Access Project; 
Coney Island 
Commons and 
YMCA

342

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Chapter

Initiative 
No.

Initiative

Initiative 
Status

Initiative Status Description

2014 Milestone

Milestone 
Status

COASTAL PROTECTION

1

2

In Progress

Create an implementation 
plan and design for an 
integrated flood protection 
system for remaining 
Southern Manhattan areas

The City, with support from the State, allocated $6.75 million in 
additional funds to conduct preliminary design and planning 
south of Montgomery Street to Battery Park City. In addition, the 
City allocated $8 million in capital funds for the implementation 
of the first-phase of construction in Battery Park. The City 
continues to pursue additional funds for further implementation, 
building on the Rebuild by Design planning and design process.

Commence 
competition and 
design study

Completed

Conduct a study for a 
multi-purpose levee along 
Lower Manhattan’s eastern 
edge to address coastal 
flooding and create economic 
development opportunities

Completed

The City completed this feasibility study, demonstrating that the 
concept of a multipurpose levee was feasible. The City will 
continue to pursue protections against long-term climate 
change impacts.

Complete initial 
feasibility study

Completed

CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

3

Construct physical 
enhancements to Water 
Street

In Progress  DOT made several safety improvements to Water Street, 

including the creation of an expanded pedestrian plaza, and an 
increase in time allowed for pedestrian street crossing.

COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC RECOVERY

Implement temporary 
programming of Water Street 
privately owned public 
spaces (POPS)

Completed DOT completed temporary art installations in Water Street and 
Whitehall Plaza and art panel installations on Gouverneur Lane 
and Water Street between Wall Street and Maiden Lane. 
NYCEDC facilitated temporary improvements and activations of 
POPS with local partner during Spring and Summer 2014. 

Complete 
temporary 
improvements 
and design 
permanent 
improvements

Approve zoning 
changes, select 
programming 
partner, and 
commence 
programming

Launch a program to enable 
permanent improvements to 
Water Street privately owned 
public spaces (POPS)

Completed DCP is currently working with NYCEDC and the Alliance for 
Downtown New York (ADNY) to draft zoning text to facilitate 
upgrades of the Water Street POPS and infill of the arcades for 
retail use. By April 2015, NYCEDC and ADNY will be preparing 
the land use application. By the end of 2015, the zoning text 
should be in public review or completed.

Create design 
criteria and solicit 
design 
proposals; 
facilitate land use 
approvals

Implement planned and 
ongoing investments in the 
South Street Seaport

In Progress  The City continues to implement investments in the South Street 

Seaport.

Use the Job Creation & 
Retention Program to attract 
and retain businesses in 
Sandy-impacted areas of 
Lower Manhattan

Expand Take the HELM 
program (Hire and Expand in 
Lower Manhattan)

Implement planned and 
ongoing investments by the 
City and private partners

In Progress  The Job Creation & Retention Program was extended through 

2015 and the vast majority of project funding has been 
expended on projects in southern Manhattan, with the 
remainder of the funds to be expended by the end of the year.

In Progress  The Take the HELM program was created in 2012 to reward 
innovative technology and creative companies for moving to 
Lower Manhattan south of Chambers Street. Since 2012, two 
successful iterations of the competition have been completed 
and nine companies have been awarded cash prizes of 
$250,000 for moving to or relocating in Lower Manhattan. In 
2015, a third iteration of the program will help develop a more 
resilient Lower Manhattan by building stronger networks and 
deeper collaboration among tech/creative tenants.

In Progress  The City continues to implement investments to increase 

resiliency in Southern Manhattan.

Complete 
resiliency 
improvements to 
Schermerhorn 
Row and 
Museum Block

Extend and 
create a new 
program to make 
awards to new 
and renewing 
tenants

Expand 
competition and 
make awards to 
businesses new 
to Lower 
Manhattan in the 
100-year 
floodplain

N
A
T
T
A
H
N
A
M

 

N
R
E
H
T
U
O
S

4

5

6

7

8

9

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Complete 
Hudson Yards 
South Tower, 
Peck Slip School

Partially 
Completed

343

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City References

Abrams, S.A., et al., Greater Mortality and 
Morbidity in Extremely Preterm Infants Fed a 
Diet Containing Cow Milk Protein Products, 
Prolacta Bioscience (2014)

Academy of Pediatrics, Childhood Obesity and 
Neighborhood Food Store Availability in an Inner 
City Community (2009)

Aligne, C.A., et al, Association of Pediatric Dental 
Caries with Passive Smoking (2003)

American Academy of Pediatrics Policy 
Statement: Breastfeeding and the Use of Human 
Milk, Pediatrics (2012)

Amtrak Agency Communication (2015)

Association of Bay Area Governments, Plan Bay 
Area (2013)

Behm, I., et al., Increasing Prevalence of 
Smoke-free Homes and Decreasing Rates of 
Sudden Infant Death Syndrome in the United 
States: An Ecological Association Study, Tobacco 
Control (2011)

Blaes, A., et al., Effects of a Playground Marking 
Intervention on School Recess Physical Activity 
in French Children, Preventive Medicine (2013)

Boston Consulting Group, Evaluating NYC Media 
Sector Development and Setting the Stage for 
Future Growth (2012)

Boutelle, K., Using Signs, Artwork and Music to 
Promote Stair Use in a Public Building, American 
Journal of Public Health (2004)

Broadway League, Broadway Calendar Year 
Statistics (2014)

Broadway League, Broadway’s Economic 
Contribution to NYC 2012-2013 (2013)

Bullard, R., People-of-Color Environmentalism, 
from Dumping in Dixie: Race, Class, and 
Environmental Quality (1990)

Campbell, J.C., et al., Risk Factors for Femicide in 
Abusive Relationships: Results from a Multi-site 
Case Control Study, American Journal of Public 
Health (2003)

Center for an Urban Future: Caution Ahead 
(2014)

Center for an Urban Future, Launching Low 
Income Entrepreneurs (2013)

Center for an Urban Future, Small Business 
Success (2014)

Center for Public Education, Starting Out Right: 
Pre-k and Kindergarten: Full Report (2012)

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Heat 
Illness and Deaths - New York City, 2000–2011 
(2013)

CityLab, A New Campaign Takes Aim at New 
York’s Growing Chain Stores (2015)

City of New York, A Stronger, More Resilient 
New York (2013)

City of New York, Career Pathways: One City 
Working Together (2014)

City of New York, Center for Economic 
Opportunity, The CEO Poverty Measure, 
2005-2013, (April 2014)

City of New York, Food Metrics Report (2014)

City of New York, Housing New York: A 
Five-Borough, Ten-Year Plan (2014)

City of New York, Inventory of New York City 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions (2014)

City of New York, Office of Management Budget, 
Capital Plan Summary, 2014-2023 (2013)

City of New York, Office of the Comptroller, 
Internet Inequality: Broadband Access in NYC 
(2014)

City of New York, Office of the Mayor, 
Transcript: de Blasio Administration Launches 
Major Manufacturing Expansion at Brooklyn 
Navy Yard (2014)

City of New York, One City: Built to Last (2014)

City of New York, One City, Rebuilding Together 
(2014)

City of New York, Pathways to Deep Carbon 
Reductions (2013) 

City of New York, PlaNYC 2007 (2007)

City of New York, Ready to Launch: NYC’s 
Implementation Plan for Free, High-Quality, 
Full-Day Universal Pre-Kindergarten (2014)

City of New York, Vision Zero Action Plan (2014)

Coca, V., The Research Alliance for New York 
City Schools, New York City Goes to College: A 
First Look at Patterns of College Enrollment, 
Persistence, and Degree Attainment for NYC 
High School Students (2014)

Con Edison NYC Infrastructure Plan 2015-2019

Con Edison, Storm Hardening and Resiliency 
Collaborative Report (2013)

Connecticut Department of Transportation, 
Transportation Infrastructure Capital Plan 
2015-2019 (2014)

Contra Costa Health Services, Closing the 
Black-White Gap in Birth Outcome: A Life-
Course Approach (2010)

Coultas, D. B., Passive Smoking and Risk of Adult 
Asthma and COPD: An Update, Thorax (1998)

Demographic Snapshots (DOE) (2014)

Environmental Protection Agency, 2011 National 
Emissions Inventory, Version 1 (2011)

Environmental Protection Agency, Air Quality 
System: Air Quality Statistics Report (2014)

Environmental Protection Agency, Heavy-Duty 
Highway Compression-Ignition Engines and 
Urban Buses - Exhaust Emission Standards 
(2013)

Fiscal Policy Institute, New York City’s Recovery 
Finally Starts Generating Wage Gains (2015)

Five Borough Farm, Seeding the Future of Urban 
Agriculture in New York City (2012)

Gillespie, L.D., et al., Cochrane Database Systems 
Review, Interventions for Preventing Falls in 
Older People Living in the Community (2012)

Greater London Authority, The London Plan, 
2013-2015 (2013)

Helicon Collaborative, Evaluation: The 
Rockefeller Foundation Cultural Innovation 
Fund (2013)

Hoeing, H., Critical Review: Vegetables and Fruit 
in the Prevention of Chronic Diseases, European 
Journal of Nutrition (2012)

Jackson, M.R., et al., The Urban Institute’s Arts 
and Culture Indicators in Community Building 
Project, Culture Counts in Communities: A 
Framework for Measurement (2002)

Jackson, R.J., et al., Health and the Built 
Environment: 10 Years After,  American Journal 
of Public Health (2013)

Kaczynski, A.T., et al., Association of Workplace 
Supports with Active Commuting, Preventing 
Chronic Disease (2010)

Kane, T., The Impact of After-School Programs: 
Interpreting the Results of Four Recent 
Evaluations (Working Paper) (2004)

Kheirbek, I., et al., The Public Health Benefits of 
Reducing Fine Particulate Matter through 
Conversion to Cleaner Heating Fuels in New 
York City, Environmental Science and 
Technology (2014)

Klepeis, N.E., et al., The National Human Activity 
Pattern Survey (NHAPS): A Resource for 
Assessing Exposure to Environmental Pollutants, 
Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental 
Epidemiology (2001)

Klinenberg, E., Heat Wave: A Social Autopsy of 
Disaster in Chicago (1995)

Larson, N.I., et al., Neighborhood Environments: 
Disparities in Access to Healthy Foods in the U.S., 
American Journal of Preventive Medicine (2009)

344

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City nyc.gov/onenycLaw, M.R., et al., Environmental Tobacco Smoke 
Exposure and Ischaemic Heart Disease: An 
Evaluation of the Evidence, British Medical 
Journal (1997)

Law, M.R., Hackshaw, A. K., Environmental 
Tobacco Smoke, British Medical Bulletin (1996)

Lesnick, J., et al., Chapin Hall at the University of 
Chicago, Reading on Grade Level in Third Grade: 
How Is It Related to High School Performance 
and College Enrollment? (2010)

Local Economies Project, Hudson Valley Food 
Hubs (2013)

Lu, M.C., Halfon, N., Racial and Ethnic 
Disparities in Birth Outcomes: A Life-Course 
Perspective, Maternal and Child Health Journal 
(2003)

Map the Meal Gap, Feeding America (2014)

McCord, M.T., et al., School-Based Clinic Use and 
School Performance, Journal of Adolescent 
Health (1993)

Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Capital 
Program 2010-2014 (2010)

Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Capital 
Program 2015-2019 (2014)

Metropolitan Transportation Authority, 
Ridership at a Glance (2013)

Metsios, G. S., et al., Passive Smoking and the 
Development of Cardiovascular Disease in 
Children: A Systematic Review, Cardiology 
Research and Practice (2011)

Morgan, W.J., et al., Results of a Home-based 
Environmental Intervention Among Urban 
Children with Asthma, New England Journal of 
Medicine (2004)

National Association for College Admission 
Counseling, Effective Counseling in Schools 
Increases College Access (2006)

National Grid Agency Communication (2015)

National Institutes of Health, FY 2013 
RePORTER Project Data (2013)

National League of Cities, Cities and the Nation’s 
Disposal Crisis: A Report of the National League 
of Cities and the U.S. Conference of Mayors Solid 
Waste Management Task Force (1973)

New Jersey Department of Transportation, 
Statewide Transportation Improvement Program 
(2013)

New Jersey Turnpike Authority, Annual Budget 
(2015)

New York City Community Schools Strategic 
Plan (2015)

New York City Council, Foodworks: A Vision to 
Improve NYC’s Food System (2011)

New York City Department of City Planning, 
Going to Market: New York City’s Neighborhood 
Grocery Store and Supermarket Shortage (2008)

New York City Department of City Planning, 
New York City Population Projections by Age/
Sex and Borough: 2010-2040 (2013)

New York City Department of City Planning, 
Retrofitting Buildings for Flood Risk (2014)

New York City Department of Environmental 
Protection, City Announces Innovative New 
Partnerships That Will Reduce the Amount of 
Organic Waste Sent to Landfills, Produce a 
Reliable Source of Clean Energy and Improve Air 
Quality (2013)

New York City Department of Environmental 
Protection, Final Environmental Impact 
Statement (FEIS) for the Water for the Future 
Program: Delaware Aqueduct Rondout-West 
Branch Tunnel Repair (2012)

New York City Department of Environmental 
Protection, New York City 2014 Drinking Water 
Supply and Quality Report (2014)

New York City Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene, 2013 Report from the New York City 
Fatality Review Advisory Team: Understanding 
Child Injury Deaths (2014)

New York City Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene, Active Design Guidelines (2010)

New York City Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene, Air Pollution and the Health of New 
Yorkers: The Impact of Fine Particles and Ozone 
(2011)

New York City Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene, Child Community Health Survey (2009)

New York City Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene, Community Health Survey (2013)

New York City Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene, Eating Well in Harlem: How Available 
Is Healthy Food? (2007)

New York City Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene, Environment and Health Data Portal 
(2011)

New York City Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene, Epi Data Brief Heat-related Deaths in 
NYC (2013)

New York City Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene, Epi Data Brief: Describing the Food 
Environment in the South Bronx Neighborhood 
of Crotona-Tremont (2014)

New York City Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene, New York City Community Air Survey 
(2014)

New York City Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene, New York City Trends in Air Pollution 
and Its Health Consequences (2013)

New York City Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene, Summary of Vital Statistics, The City of 
New York - Mortality (2015)

New York City Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene, Unpublished Analysis of Clean Heat 
Data as of 1/2014 (2015)

New York City Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene, Youth Risk Behavior Survey 

New York City Department of Homeless Services, 
Daily Report Shelter Census

New York City Department of Housing 
Preservation and Development, Initial Findings 
of the 2014 Housing Vacancy Survey (2015)

New York City Department of Sanitation, 
Commercial Waste Study (2012)

New York City Department of Sanitation, 
Residential Waste Characterization Study (2013)

New York City Department of Sanitation, Solid 
Waste Management Plan (2006)

New York City Department of Transportation, 
Bicycle Survey (2007)

New York City Department of Transportation, 
Cycling Index (2013)

New York City Economic Development 
Corporation, Applied Sciences NYC Overview 
(2015)

New York City Economic Development 
Corporation, City Investment of $3.5 Million Will 
Support Local Apparel Manufacturing, Emerging 
Fashion Designers, and the Creation of Quality 
Jobs, Press Release (2014)

New York City Economic Development Corporation, 
Fashion.NYC.2020 (2010)

New York City Economic Development 
Corporation, Higher Education Industry 
Snapshot (2010)

New York City Economic Development Council, 
JFK Air Cargo Study (2013)

New York City Emergency Management 
Department, Hazard Mitigation Plan (2014)

New York City Mayor’s Office of Operations, New 
York City Mayor’s Management Report (2014)

New York City Mayor’s Office of Operations, 
Preliminary New York City Mayor’s Management 
Report (2015)

New York City Mayor’s Office to Combat 
Domestic Violence, Domestic Violence Fact Sheet 
(2014)

345

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City New York City Mayor’s Office to Combat 
Domestic Violence, Domestic Violence 
Snapshots: New York City Community Districts 
(2014)

New York City Mayor’s Office to Combat 
Domestic Violence, New York City Domestic 
Violence Fatality Review Committee: 2014 Annual 
Report (2014)

New York City Panel on Climate Change 2015 
Report, Building the Knowledge Base for Climate 
Resiliency (2015)

New York City Parks and Recreation, Framework 
for an Equitable Future (2014)

New York City Preliminary Capital Budget Fiscal 
Year 2016 (2015)

New York City Regional Economic Development 
Council, 2014 Progress Report (2014)

New York Metropolitan Transportation Council, 
Hub Bound Data Files (2013)

New York Metropolitan Transportation Council, 
Population and Employment Projections 2040 
(2013)

New York Police Department and New York City 
Department of Transportation, Crash Data (2015)

New York Power Authority, Financial Plan 
2015-2019 (2015)

New York State Board of Elections (2015)

New York State Department of Labor, Quarterly 
Census of Employment and Wages (2013)

New York State Department of Motor Vehicles, 
Summary of New York City Motor Vehicle 
Crashes (2015)

New York State Department of Transportation, 
Projects in Your Neighborhood (2015)

New York State Energy Research and 
Development Authority, Energy Efficiency and 
Renewable Energy Potential Study of New York 
State; Volume 3: Renewable Energy Methodology 
and Detailed Results (2014)

New York State Energy Research and 
Development Authority, New York Offshore 
Wind Cost Reduction Study (2015)

New York State Parks, Recreation and Historic 
Preservation, Agency Communication (2015)

New York State Thruway Authority, Capital 
Program Projects Map (2015)

NYC Vital Signs, Falls Among Older Adults in 
New York City (2014)

Philipp, B.L., et al., Baby-Friendly Hospital 
Initiative Improves Breastfeeding Initiation 
Rates in a US Hospital Setting, Pediatrics (2001)

Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, 
Cross Harbor Freight Program

RAND Corporation, Flood Insurance in NYC 
Following Hurricane Sandy (2013)

Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, Regional 
Investment of RGGI CO2 Allowance Proceeds 
(2012)

Regional Plan Association, Fragile Success (2014)

Rehm, C.D., et al., American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition, The Quality and Monetary Value of 
Diets Consumed by Adults in the United States 
(2011)

Ridgers, N.D., et al., Long-term Effects of 
Playground Markings and Physical Structures on 
Children’s Recess Physical Activity Levels, 
Preventive Medicine (2007)

Rosenberg, T.J., et al., Maternal Obesity and 
Diabetes as Risk Factors for Adverse Pregnancy 
Outcomes: Differences Among Four Racial/
Ethnic Groups, American Journal of Public 
Health (2005)

Safe Horizon (2015)

Sallis, J.F., Glanz, K., Physical Activity and Food 
Environments: Solutions to the Obesity 
Epidemic, Milbank Quarterly (2009)

U.S. Census Bureau, American Community 
Survey, Public Use Microdata Sample (2013)

U.S. Census Bureau, County Business Patterns 
(2012)

U.S. Census Bureau, Housing and Vacancy Survey 
(HVS) (2015)

U.S. Census Bureau, July 2014 Estimates (2014)

U.S. Census Bureau, LEHD Origin-Destination 
Employment Statistics (2011)

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
The Health Consequences of Involuntary 
Exposure to Tobacco Smoke: A Report of the 
Surgeon General (2006)

U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, Current Employment Statistics, 
2009-2014

United Nations, World Urbanization Prospects 
(2014)

Vanderbilt Corridor ULURP certification, 
Department of City Planning (2014)

Verizon Agency Communication (2015)

Wheeler, S.M., Beatley, T., The Sustainable Urban 
Development Reader (2008)

White, E.B., Here is New York (1949)

White House Report: The Economics of Early 
Childhood Investments (2014)

Schweinhart, L.J., et al., The High/Scope Perry 
Preschool Study Through Age 40 (2011)

World Health Organization Report: Evidence for 
the Ten Steps to Successful Breastfeeding (1998)

Zupan, J., Regional Plan Association, Upgrading 
to World Class: The Future of the New York 
Region’s Airports (2011)

New York City’s population is mobile and 
constantly changing, which may not be 
adequately captured by the Census Bureau’s 
estimates.  Census Bureau estimates have 
diverged substantially in the 1990’s and 2000’s 
from the actual Census counts.  The direction of 
the estimate is likely correct, given the strength 
of the city’s economy, but likely overstates the 
change in population.

Scrivener, S., et al., MDRC, Doubling Graduation 
Rates: Three-Year Effects of CUNY’s Accelerated 
Study in Associate Programs (ASAP) for 
Developmental Education Students (2015)

Singapore Urban Redevelopment Authority, A 
High Quality Living Environment for All 
Singaporeans (2013)

Small Business First, City of New York (2014)

State University of New York, Agency 
Communication (2015)

Stratton, G., Mullan E., The Effect of Multicolor 
Playground Markings on Children’s Physical 
Activity Level During Recess, Preventive Medicine 
(2005)

Trust for Public Land, City Park Facts (2014)

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, North Atlantic 
Coast Comprehensive Study (2015)

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2009-2014

Office of English Language Learners Language 
Access Report (2013)

U.S. Census Bureau, 2009-2013 5-Year American 
Community Survey (2014)

Otsuka, R., et al., Acute Effects of Passive 
Smoking on the Coronary Circulation in Healthy 
Young Adults, The Journal of the American 
Medical Association (2001)

U.S. Census Bureau, American Community 
Survey, 2009-2013

346

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Directory of Abbreviations

100-year 
floodplain 
500-year 
floodplain 
ACS

The geographical area with a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding 
in any given year
The geographical area with a 0.2 percent chance of flooding in any 
given year
New York City Administration for Children’s Services

BIC

City of New York Business Integrity Commission

BOEM

Bureau of Ocean Energy Management

CAU

CBO

CEO

Mayor’s Community Affairs Unit

Community-Based Organization

Center for Economic Opportunity

CERT 

Community Emergency Response Teams

CSO

Combined Sewer Outflow

CUNY

City University of New York

DCA

DCAS

DCP

DDC

DEP

New York City Department of Consumer Affairs

New York City Department of Citywide Administrative Services

New York City Department of City Planning

New York City Department of Design and Construction

New York City Department of Environmental Protection

DFTA

New York City Department for the Aging

DHS

DOB

DOC

DOE

DOF

DOH

New York City Department of Homeless Services

New York City Department of Buildings

New York City Department of Correction

New York City Department of Education

New York City Department of Finance

New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene

DOHMH

New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene

DOI

DOITT

DOP

DOT

DPR

DSNY

DYCD

EPA

FAA

FDNY

FEMA

FERC

FHWA

FIRM 

New York City Department of Investigation

New York City Department of Information Technology and Telecommunications

New York City Department of Probation

New York City Department of Transportation

New York City Department of Parks and Recreation

New York City Department of Sanitation

New York City Department of Youth and Community Development

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

Federal Aviation Administration

New York City Fire Department

Federal Emergency Management Agency

Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

Federal Highway Administration

Flood Insurance Rate Map

FRESH

Food Retail Expansion to Support Health

HHC 

New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation

HPD

HRA 

HRO

HUD

LIPA 

LIRR 

LPC

MMR

New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development

New York City Human Resources Administration

New York City Mayor’s Office of Housing Recovery Operations

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development

Long Island Power Authority

Long Island Rail Road

Landmarks Preservation Commission

Mayor’s Management Report

MOIGA

New York City Mayor’s Office of Intergovernmental Affairs

MOS

MTA

NAC

NFIP 

New York City Mayor’s Office of Sustainability

Metropolitan Transportation Authority

Natural Areas Conservancy

National Flood Insurance Program

NPCC 

New York City Panel on Climate Change

NPS

National Parks Service

NYCEDC New York City Economic Development Corporation

NYCEEC New York City Energy Efficiency Corporation

NYCEM New York City Emergency Management Department

NYCHA 

New York City Housing Authority

NYCSCA New York City School Construction Authority

NYPA

NYPD

New York Power Authority

New York City Police Department

NYSDEC New York State Department of Environmental Conservation

NYSDOH New York State Department of Health

NYSDOS New York State Department of State

NYSDOT New York State Department of Transportation

NYSERDA New York State Energy Research and Development Authority

NYSOSC New York State Office of the Comptroller

OER

OMB

ORR

New York City Mayor’s Office of Environmental Remediation 

New York City Office of Management and Budget

New York City Mayor’s Office of Recovery and Resiliency

PANYNJ

Port Authority of New York and New Jersey

SBS

SCA

New York City Department of Small Business Services

New York City School Construction Authority

SWMP

Solid Waste Management Plan

TLC

UHI

New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission

Urban Heat Island 

USACE

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers

USFS

United States Forest Service

347

nyc.gov/onenycOne New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City Image Credits

Introduction, Today and Tomorrow

Page 9
(NYC Timeline)
Photo credit: NYC Municipal
Archives

Page 18
(Town Hall Meeting)
Photo credit: Courtesy of New 
York City Housing Authority

Page 19
(Clergy photo)
Photo credit: Raghavan Kumar

Page 21
(PAL Program)
Photo credit: New York City 
Housing Authority

Page 23
(5 boro bike tour)
Photo credit: NYC & Company

Page 24-25
(Skyline)
Photo credit: NYC & Company

Page 32
(Infrastructure needs)
Photo credit: New York City
Department of Environmental
Protection

Page 42-43
(Technology spotlight)
Photo: NYC & Company

Vision 1

Page 54
(Applied Science)
Photo / Rendering credit: 
Kilograph

Page 51
(Brooklyn Navy Yard - Building 92)
Photo credit: Tom Olcott

Page 57
(Casita Maria and Dancing in
the Streets)
Photo credit: Danza Fiesta at
Paseo Photo courtesy of Casita
Maria and Dancing in the Streets

Page 66
(Rent burden)
Figure: 2014 New York City
Housing and Vacancy Survey

Page 87
(Red Hook Container Terminal)
Photo credit: Joshua Nelson

Page 87
(Port Authority Bus Terminal)
Photo credit: Michael Nagle

Page 92
(Ferry passengers)
Photo credit: Hannah Henn

Page 163
(Port Richmond Waste Water
Treatment Plant solar panels)
Photo credit: Emily Dean,
Department of Citywide
Administrative Services

Page 194
(Brownfield site)
Photo credit: Mayor’s Office of
Environmental Remediation

Page 204
(Transmitter water bottle
refilling station and fountain)
Photo credit: Design by WXY

Page 101
(Students in a cafeteria at Frank
Sinatra School of the Arts High
School in Queens)
Photo credit: NYC Department  
of Education

Vision 4

Page 221
(Hunts Point Resiliency)
Rendering credit:  
PennDesign / OLIN

Page 241
(Cortlandt Street Tunnel)
Photo credit: Cortland St Tunnel
Image © MTA New York CIty
Transit / Marc A. Hermann

Page 247
(East Side Coastal Resiliency)
Rendering credit: Bjarke Ingels
Group

Page 250
(Multipurpose levee)
Rendering credit: NYC Economic
Development Corporation

Cover image
Ramiro Olaciregui / Getty Images

We would like to thank the New
York City Mayoral Photography
Office for the many photos they 
provided for the report

Vision 2

Page 127
(Saolme Urena de Henriquez
Campus School)
Photo credit: Julio Alvarado

Page 137
(Staircase)
Photo credit: Nikolas Koenig
courtesy of 1100 Architect

Page 137
(Riverside Health Center)
Photo credit: Nikolas Koenig
courtesy of 1100 Architect

Page 143
(Access to hospitals)
Photo credit: Office of the Public
Advocate, City of New York

Vision 3

Page 163
(Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge)
Photo credit: New York City
Department of Environmental
Protection

Page 221
(Harding Park)
Photo credit: © New York City 
Department of City Planning.  
All rights reserved.

Page 221
(Starlight Park)
Photo credit: NYC Department of
Parks and Recreation

Page 223
(Sheryl Nash-Chisholm)
Photo credit: Red Hook Initiative

Page 224
(CERT Volunteer)
Photo credit: NYC Emergency
Management Department

Page 231
(Build it Back home)
Photo: Mayor’s Office of Housing
Recovery Operations

Page 232
(Retrofit strategy for an
attached home)
Rendering credit: © New York
City Department of City
Planning. All rights reserved.

348

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City nyc.gov/onenycAcknowledgments

OneNYC is the product of the tremendous dedication, hard work, 
and input from nearly all City offices and agencies, as well as the 
immense number of community and non-profit organizations, elected 
officials, experts, academics, and private sector leaders who 
contributed their time and energy to share their knowledge of the 
city, helping us shape the innovative strategies and initiatives in 
OneNYC. We want to thank the exceptionally hardworking and 
talented team at NYC & Company for all of their assistance. And 
finally, OneNYC would not have been possible without the help of 
over 10,000 New Yorkers who voiced their opinions at town hall 
meetings and online, providing invaluable insights and ideas about 
our city. OneNYC is for them—and for future generations. 

We would especially like to thank the following:

Steering Committee 
Anthony Shorris, Chair, First Deputy Mayor

Larian Angelo, First Deputy Director, Office of Management  
and Budget 

Richard Buery, Deputy Mayor for Strategic Policy Initiatives

William Goldstein, Senior Advisor to the Mayor for Recovery, 
Resiliency, and Infrastructure

Mindy Tarlow, Director, Office of Operations

Carl Weisbrod, Chairman, New York City Planning Commission; 
Director, New York City Department of City Planning

Daniel A. Zarrilli, Director, Office of Recovery and Resiliency

Project Director 
Nilda Mesa, Director, Office of Sustainability

OneNYC Team
Ibrahim Abdul-Matin, Susan Ambrosini, Oxiris Barbot, Ian Bassin, 
Caitlin Benson, Ben Branham, Steven Caputo, Tina Chiu, Kate 
Collignon, Sarah Currie-Halpern, Linara Davidson, Michael 
DeLoach, Christine D’Onofrio, Chloe Drew, Nellie Dunn, Andrew 
Eickmann, Casey Enders, Fenimore Fisher, Rick Fromberg, Danny 
Fuchs, Ben Furnas, Karin Goldmark, Molly Hartman, Peter Hatch, 
Jonelle Hooper, Pablo Illanes, Lolita Jackson, Asima Jansveld, 
Morgan Jones, Purnima Kapur, James Katz, Trevor Kenmure, Jee 
Mee Kim, Martha King, Kumar Kintala, Matthew Klein, Jonathan 
Law, Douglas Le, John Lee, Nicolas Lefevre-Marton, Jose Louis, 
Gwendolyn Litvak, Xiao Linda Liu, Anish Melwani, Morgan 
Monaco, Olivia Moss, Sophie Nitkin, Joseph Pikiewicz, Anna 
Poe-Kest, Albert Pulido, Vincent Riscica, Jack Robbins, RoseAnn 
Ryan, Kavya Shankar, Jessica Singleton, Laura Slutsky, Howard 
Slatkin, Sarah Solon, Amy Spitalnick, Jenny Sobelman, Jamie 
Springer, Daniel Steinberg, Minerva Tantoco, Eddie Torres, Barbara 
Turk, Sonam Velani, Kelly Wang, Ala Warren, Dominic Williams, 
Adam Zaranko, 100 Resilient Cities

The incredibly hardworking staffs at the following  
City offices and agencies:
Office of the First Deputy Mayor, Office of the Deputy Mayor for 
Health and Human Services, Office of the Deputy Mayor for Housing 
& Economic Development, Office of the Deputy Mayor for Strategic 
Policy Initiatives, Administration for Children’s Services, Business 
Integrity Commission, Center for Economic Opportunity, Civilian 
Complaint Review Board, Commission on Human Rights, 
Community Affairs Unit, Department for the Aging, Department of 
Buildings, Department of City Planning, Department of Citywide 
Administrative Services, Department of Consumer Affairs, 
Department of Correction, Department of Cultural Affairs, 
Department of Design and Construction, Department of Education, 
Department of Environmental Protection, Department of Finance, 
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, Department of Homeless 
Services, Department of Housing Preservation and Development, 
Department of Information Technology and Telecommunications, 
Department of Investigation, Department of Parks and Recreation, 
Department of Probation, Department of Records and Information 
Services, Department of Sanitation, Department of Small Business 
Services, Department of Transportation, Department of Youth and 
Community Development, Health and Hospitals Corporation, 
Human Resources Administration, Landmarks Preservation 
Commission, Law Department, Mayor’s Office for Food Policy, 
Mayor’s Office for People with Disabilities, Mayor’s Office of 
Administrative Trials and Hearings, Mayor’s Office of Appointments, 
Mayor’s Office of Contract Services, Mayor’s Office of Criminal 
Justice, Mayor’s Office of Environmental Remediation, Mayor’s 
Office of Housing Recovery Operations, Mayor’s Office of Immigrant 
Affairs, Mayor’s Office of Intergovernmental Affairs, Mayor’s Office 
of International Affairs, Mayor’s Office of Labor Relations, Mayor’s 
Office of Management and Budget, Mayor’s Office of Media and 
Entertainment, Mayor’s Office of Operations, Mayor’s Office of 
Recovery and Resiliency, Mayor’s Office of Strategic Partnerships, 
Mayor’s Office of Sustainability, Mayor’s Office of Technology & 
Innovation, Mayor’s Office of Veteran’s Affairs, Mayor’s Office to 
Combat Domestic Violence, NYC 311, NYC Economic Development 
Corporation, NYC Emergency Management Department, NYC Fire 
Department, NYC Housing Authority, NYC Housing Development 
Corporation, NYC Police Department, NYC Service, Office of the 
Chief Medical Examiner, Public Design Commission, Recovery, 
Resiliency and Infrastructure, School Construction Authority, Taxi 
and Limousine Commission

OneNYC is published pursuant to Local Law 84 of 2013

Design by NYC & Company
Project Lead: Sarah McCue Callaghan
Creative Director: Emily Lessard
Lead Designer: Louis Lee
Designers: Caitlin Clingman, Sara Duell, Noah Venezia

349

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City nyc.gov/onenycMayor’s Sustainability Advisory Board

Co-Chairs
Larisa Ortiz, Larisa Ortiz Associates; Commissioner, New York 
City Planning Commission 

Donovan Richards, Jr., City Council, Chair, Committee on 
Environmental Protection 

Jeffrey D. Sachs, Director of The Earth Institute, Quetelet 
Professor of Sustainable Development, and Professor of Health 
Policy and Management at Columbia University;  Special Advisor 
to United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on the 
Millennium Development Goals

Bomee Jung, Deputy Director, Enterprise Community Partners, 
City Planning Commission

Eric Klinenberg, Professor of Sociology, NYU

Gary LaBarbera, President of the NYC Building and 
Construction Trades Council

Peter J. Madonia, CEO, The Rockefeller Foundation

Melissa Mark-Viverito, Speaker, New York City Council

Cheryl McKissack Daniel, President & CEO, McKissack & 
McKissack

Members
Vincent Alvarez, President, New York City Central Labor Council

Richard T. Anderson, President, New York Building Congress

Michael Northrop, Program Director, Rockefeller Brothers Fund

Kate Orff, Founder & Design Director, SCAPE/Landscape 
Architecture

Jennifer Jones Austin, CEO and Executive Director, The 
Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies

Adam Parris, Director of Jamaica Bay Science and Resilience 
Institute at Jamaica Bay, CUNY

John Banks, President, Real Estate Board of New York

Xavier de Souza Briggs, Vice President, Ford Foundation 

Carlton Brown, CEO, Full Spectrum of NY, LLC 

Marcia Bystryn, President, New York League of Conservation 
Voters

Andrew H. Darrell, Chief of Strategy, Energy and New York 
Regional Director at Environmental Defense Fund

Jenny Dixon, Director, The Noguchi Museum

Margaret O’Donoghue Castillo, President-Elect, American 
Institute of Architects, New York State 

Ingrid Ellen, Faculty Director, Furman Center for Real Estate 
and Urban Policy

Robert E. Englert, Director of Land Use, Planning & 
Infrastructure

William Floyd, Head of External Affairs, Google

Peter Goldmark, Independent Consultant

Henry Gutman, Chairman of the Board, Brooklyn Navy Yard; 
Simpson Thacher & Bartlett LLP

David R. Jones, President & CEO, Community Service Society of 
New York

Lee H. Perlman, Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice 
President, Greater New York Hospital Association

Allison Sesso, Executive Director, Human Services Council of 
New York

Peggy Shepard, Executive Director, WE ACT for Environmental 
Justice

Kate Sinding, Senior Attorney and Deputy Director, New York 
Urban Program of Natural Resources Defense Council 

Lisa Sorin, Executive Director, Westchester Square Business 
Improvement District

Amy Sugimori, Director of Policy and Legislation, Local 32BJ 
SEIU

Mark Treyger, City Council, Chair, Committee on Recovery and 
Resiliency 

Thomas K. Wright, President, Regional Plan Association

Kathryn Wylde, President & CEO, Partnership for New York City

Elizabeth C. Yeampierre, Executive Director, UPROSE

350

One New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City nyc.gov/onenycnyc.gov/onenyc 
#OneNYC

Printed on 100% post-consumer recyled paper

