CITY OF BOULDER
RESILIENCE 
STRATEGY 

VISION STATEMENT

VISION

Building on a legacy of innovation, 
Boulder will cultivate a creative 
spirit to adapt to and thrive in 
a changing climate, economy, 
and society.

MICHAEL BERKOWITZ
President of 100 Resilient Cities - 
Pioneered by The Rockefeller 
Foundation.

RESILIENT BOULDER
AND 100 RESILIENT CITIES (100RC)

The launch of Boulder’s first resilience strategy is a continuation of long 
legacy. Over the last century, Boulder has consistently served as a destination 
for individuals defined by their creative and innovative spirit, originating some 
of the most progressive policies in the United States in a variety of areas. Its long 
history of preserving open space and its bold climate action plans and programs 
are just a few examples. This work complements your history in sustainability 
and establishes Boulder at the vanguard of the urban resilience revolution that 
will define our time.
This strategy takes a comprehensive and honest view of Boulder’s resilience 
challenges and opportunities. It outlines a path forward for the city to confront 
not just its most obvious shocks, like flash flooding or wildfires, but also the 
chronic stresses, such as the need for affordable housing, integrated regional 
planning, and strong, cohesive communities, which exacerbate those shocks 
and impact the city over the long term. 
None of this could have been accomplished without the stalwart support and 
vision of the Mayor, Suzanne Jones, City Manager, Jane Brautigam and the 
Boulder City Council. We also extend our thanks to Boulder’s exceptional Chief 
Resilience Officer, Greg Guibert. Greg led a tremendous effort over the course of 
the past year of robust research, extensive community outreach, and thoughtful 
planning in order to make this strategy come to fruition. 

What makes Boulder’s strategy a leading example for our international network 
of member cities is the way in which it integrates world-class solutions from 
our platform of partners, while also highlighting the various city-to-city 
connections Boulder has facilitated through the 100RC network. Boulder has 
hosted resilience delegations from Da Nang, Vietnam around climate change 
mitigation efforts, and will do so again, with another 100 Resilient Cities 
partner, Wellington, New Zealand around a community based resilience 
outreach program, in the coming months. 
Going forward, we know that this bold vision will strengthen your work to make 
Boulder a more resilient city for the entire community. As you begin to 
implement the various initiatives outlined in this strategy, I am confident that 
Boulder will continue to honor its history as an urban innovator, and begin to 
export the lessons we learn together to cities across the 100RC network and 
beyond. My congratulations to you all, on behalf of the entire 100 Resilient Cities 
team. We look forward to partnering with Boulder on its resilience journey for 
many years to come. 

LETTER FROM MAYOR

Dear neighbors,

We are delighted to present Boulder’s Resilience Strategy, a document that reflects approaches our community will be taking as we work to 
strengthen our preparedness for – and ability to respond to – future challenges. These approaches build on what we already know works in our 
highly engaged community, as well as best practices we have learned about as one of the inaugural cities participating in the 100 Resilient 
Cities program. We are so appreciative of the opportunity to work with 100RC and the cohort of other cities in the program, and want to 
acknowledge their leadership in this crucial endeavor. 

You will notice that each of the strategic focus areas in our Resilience Strategy is defined by verbs. This is by design. We know that the best way 
to make Boulder more resilient in the face of stress is to act – to act now, to act strategically and with appropriate coordination, and to act 
together. And as you can see, there is an exciting group of initiatives underway under each of these focus areas.

In exploring what it means to be a “resilient” community, this resultant strategy recognizes the importance of broadening our understanding 
of potential future stresses. We know from recent experiences that wildfires and floods are very real dangers in Boulder. But this plan covers so 
much more. How can Boulder leverage the emerging risk of the Emerald Ash Borer beetle, for example, to make our forestry systems and 
practices stronger? How can we strengthen the social fabric of our neighborhoods and provide more support to particularly vulnerable 
populations so they can withstand potential economic downturns more effectively? How can the city work with the business community to 
ensure that they have plans in place to recover quickly  after disruptions?

As you read through this strategy document, we hope you will feel the same pride we do for our community. Many of you have played a role in 
the creation of this framework. You’ve participated in forums and learning opportunities. You’ve engaged in dialogue with our Chief Resilience 
Officer Greg Guibert. And you’ve provided input that has helped us understand our community’s priorities. We are so grateful for this kind of 
support and engagement. Our people and our sense of community continue to be among our greatest assets as we work toward the shared 
goal of strengthening Boulder and implementing the many terrific programs outlined in this plan. Let’s work together to make Boulder the very 
best – and strongest – it can be!

Sincerely,

Suzanne  Jones
Mayor

Jane Brautigam
City Manager

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 

1. Challenge 

2. Context 

3. Approach

4. Strategies 

5. Credits

BOULDER

pg. 1

pg. 7

pg. 17

pg. 23

pg. 45

CHALLENGE

1BOULDER’S CHALLENGE

BOULDER has a long history of planning today for the challenges of tomorrow, creating innovative solutions, and undertaking successful resilience-building 
activities and projects. From its 40+ year legacy of open space preservation, to pioneering commitments to climate action goals, the community has supported some 
of the most progressive resilience activities in the country for decades, even before we saw them as building Boulder’s resilience. 

In order to mobilize the resources and community support necessary to significantly increase social, economic and ecological resilience, we must have a compelling vision 
of the future that allows us to adapt and thrive in the face of disruption. Tapping into the community’s forward-thinking civic and planning culture, the goal is to weave 
resilience into the day-to-day life and functions of community and government. This strategy knits those activities together and presents new actions to address gaps and 
weaknesses discovered through a community-wide assessment to create an integrated, strategic, and intentional approach to building resilience. The actions included here 
are immediately implementable activities that take advantage of partnerships and resources offered by the 100 Resilient Cities network. They build off of a long and fruitful 
legacy in Boulder’s community and intend to bring new resources and perspectives to existing ones. 

An Unpredictable Future
Like many cities and communities across the country and around the world, Boulder is adjusting to a “new normal,” where the effects of climate change are becoming 
increasingly apparent. And like residents of other cities that have recently experienced a severe natural disaster, many of us understandably perceive resilience as preparing 
for the kinds of events that are magnified by climate change. But shocks are not limited to natural hazards or the effects of climate change. A hyper-connected economy and 
the ability for pests and diseases to circle the globe with unprecedented speed, for example, mean the community is confronting a host of challenges that can strike at little 
notice and have severe, unknowable repercussions. 

Boulder’s complex topography and natural climate variability make it difficult, and sometimes impossible, to predict when and how often extreme events may occur. 
Flash flooding, for example, does not follow the boundaries of established flood maps, a lesson learned through the adversity of the 2013 floods. Flash floods may inundate 
neighborhoods and roads with little advance notice, impacting locations that may not have experienced flooding in the past. 

At the same time, increasing global temperatures exacerbate many of these hazards. The 2011 National Academies of Science assessment indicates that a one-degree 
Celsius rise in temperature would increase fire incidence probabilities by over 600 percent. Rising temperatures also increase the length of drought cycles, which intensify 
flood, fire risks and create additional risks for Boulder’s water supply. These dry conditions have in turn exacerbated insect, exotic weed, and disease threats in the flora and 
fauna communities. These complex climate and ecological connections show the tight linkages between Boulder’s risks and complicate solutions to any single problem, 
necessitating a holistic approach.

Multiple independent measurements confirm widespread warming in the western United 
States. In Colorado, temperatures increased by approximately 2°F between 1977 and 2006.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

      - COLORADO CLIMATE PLAN

2

BOULDER’S CHALLENGE

Interlinked Hazards
Boulder’s natural hazards are tightly linked, necessitating a comprehensive and integrated 
approach to risk mitigation. Droughts stress the city’s ecosystems, helping accelerate the damage 
of pests to forests, thereby increasing the fuel for wildfires, and consequently denuding slopes and 
increasing flash flooding risk. But this cycle itself is not linear; each event builds on another and sets 
the stage for even more complex interactions. Therefore, to address these interlinked hazards, 
activities and programs must be well coordinated, using a systemic approach to reduce multiple 
risks at the same time and prepare communities to handle disruptions of any kind.

UNDERLYING STRESSES
Resilience is not only about disaster preparedness and extreme events. It is about addressing the 
chronic stresses on a fundamental level that weaken the fabric of a city on a day-to-day or cyclical 
basis. By focusing on both shocks and stresses together, Boulder becomes more able to respond to 
challenging events and is more likely to thrive as a happy, healthy and inclusive community.

Boulder’s regional Fire 
Training Center was 
completed in mid-2010 
and is used across Boulder 
County by all 26 fire 
departments.  It served as a 
regional hub and emergency 
control center during the 
September 7, 2010 Fourmile 
Canyon Fire. 

“Lower-income people are among the least able to recover, yet they 
are often central to the economy and culture of a community.” 

- ISET INTERNATIONAL

Shocks Expose Stresses
Boulder’s social and economic stresses are sometimes harder to see, but can be exposed and exacerbated during a crisis or disaster. The city’s vibrant economy and high 
quality of life often mask latent stresses that strain the community and make it less resilient overall. Natural disasters like floods and fires disproportionately impact 
low-income residents who already struggle to thrive in a city that is becoming more unaffordable. A Boulderite living on a fixed income, for example, whose home is 
damaged in a disaster has limited options to find affordably-priced alternatives because the city has a constrained supply of housing. 

Stresses can also present a threat to our economic future. Successful, thriving cities need young people to fuel their economic pipeline. However, in Boulder, individuals 
between the ages of 25 to 44 is a cohort that has declined by 15 percent since 2000. Similarly, increasing real estate prices have also affected the commercial sector. High 
office rents and limited commercial space hamper the opportunity of growth-stage firms seeking to expand from start-up status, and many of these companies choose to 
expand in places like Denver and Longmont where there may be more available space.

10% 

Percentage 
of Boulder 
families that 
have children 
under the 
poverty level. 

4

BOULDER’S CHALLENGE

Boulder’s Core Resilience Challenges:

Natural events such as flooding and wildfires will become more frequent and severe as a result of climate change.

Ecological and social stresses are tied to hazards and will negatively impact and exacerbate each other.

Rising housing and commercial real estate costs may limit the diversity of residents and businesses and threaten long-term economic vitality, community 
character and social cohesion.

Boulder’s residents, businesses and government need to work together to be vigilant and prepared for future disruption.

Resilient Communities and Government 
At a community level, preparing for an uncertain future means understanding our risks and being vigilant 
for the unexpected, whether it is a flash flood or global recession. It means that individuals, families and 
neighborhoods strengthen ties to support each other during times of need. Residents will need to reach 
out to their neighbors, particularly the most vulnerable and isolated individuals, to support each other 
when disaster strikes and critical systems fail. Business owners will need to create business 
continuity plans and understand the available public and private resources to prepare for the 
economic risks they face. 

At the same time, local government must plan for and respond to shocks that affect the city 
and stresses by working collaboratively across departments and jurisdictional boundaries, as 
well as with private and institutional stakeholders. This collaborative approach will facilitate 
more robust information sharing and analysis, development of cross-cutting solutions and 
strategic private-public partnerships. 

Leveraging Boulder’s History of Planning Innovation
 
Boulder’s pioneering spirit and commitment to advancing critical initiatives such as open 
space preservation, climate mitigation and inclusive affordable housing happened decades 
before the rest of the country adopted similar efforts. Through this strategy, and as reflected 
by the process leading up to the preparation of this document, the Boulder community will 
prepare and adapt to existing and future challenges by infusing resilience into the day-to-day 
operations and activities of residents, businesses and government. 

City Highlight 
City Highlight: 
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY INITIATIVES
We recognize that housing affordability is a key 
issue for the community. It ensures that Boulder 
remains a place for residents of different 
backgrounds, incomes and household sizes. 
• Boulder’s mandatory inclusionary housing 
  ordinance requires 20 percent of housing in
  new developments to be priced affordably 
  for low-income households.
• As of August 2015, there are 3,586 units in 
  Boulder’s affordable housing program. This        
  represents 8 percent of the total units in the   
  city, which puts Boulder 2 percent away from 
  the city’s goal of making 10 percent of all 
  housing units affordable. 

City Highlight 

City Highlight 

FISCAL LEADERSHIP
Leadership in fiscal resilience is making 
Boulder better equipped to respond to and 
recover from economic shocks, whether this 
is withstanding a global recession or 
responding to a major event. 
• For many Front Range cities, nearly 75
  percent of revenues come from sales
  taxes; in Boulder, less than 45 percent of 
  sales taxes comprise the city’s general fund,
  thereby helping to insulate the city’s 
  finances from periodic declines in tourism 
  or cyclical economic shifts..
• One of the city’s primary financial policies
  is that one-time revenues shall only be
  used to cover one-time expenses and that
  ongoing costs should not be greater than
  ongoing revenues. 

OPEN SPACE CONSERVATION
Nearly 50 years ago, Boulder voters enacted 
an open space initiative where residents taxed 
themselves to purchase and preserve und
eveloped land surrounding the city, an 
unprecedented feat at the time and even 
today still rarely emulated. 
• The roots of our community’s robust open
  space system date back to 1875 to 1929 when
  the city acquired over 5,000 acres, including
  Chautauqua, Buckingham Park (in Left 
  Hand Canyon) and much of the mountain 
  backdrop.
• There are more than 45,000 acres of land
  with 151 miles of trails in the city’s open 
  space system, with an additional 102,000 
  acres in the County’s system. New land is   
  acquired through sales tax revenues, bond
  issues, private donations and development
  dedication. Nearly 5.3 million visitors enjoy 
  the city’s open space each year. 

6

CONTEXT

2BOULDER IN CONTEXT

Boulder has a long 
history of planning 
today for the challenges 
of tomorrow, creating 
innovative solutions 
and undertaking 
many successful 
resilience-building 
activities and projects. 

Located at the base of the foothills of the Rocky 
Mountains, Boulder is a small city with a high 
quality of life, a diverse and vibrant economic 
base and tremendous open space resources. The 
community enjoys the natural and recreational 
amenities resulting from decades of progressive 
land use planning which preserves a vast rural and 
undeveloped landscape that encircles the city. 
Boulder is truly a city whose identity and future is 
inextricably linked with the natural environment, 
and environmental sustainability has been a 
long-standing and primary guiding principle in 
planning and policies.  A strong commitment to 
sustainability is regularly reinforced through 
voter-initiated ballot measures to increase 
taxation for additional open space preservation 
or carbon reduction measures. 

8

BOULDER IN CONTEXT

162 HOMES DESTROYED 

IN THE 2010 

FOUR MILE CANYON FIRE

BOULDER IS DEPENDENT ON 
SNOWPACK, WHICH CAN VARY; 
2011 WAS A RECORD YEAR FOR 

SNOWPACK WHILE 2012 
WAS AMONG THE WORST.

ALL 15 OF BOULDER’S
WATERWAYS  FLOODED

IN 2013

23O ACRES BURNED 
IN THE 2012 FLAGSTAFF 

FIRE

Boulder is inextricably 
linked to the mountains,
which contain the city’s 
watershed and attract  
over 5.3 million visitors
to its open spaces each year.

BOULDER’S natural terrain and location at the mouth of numerous canyons creates a constant flood risk for the city. Fifteen major creeks pass through town, 
including Boulder Creek, which flows right through downtown. The Front Range is also susceptible to wildfires and drought, which create dry, less vegetated conditions and 
contribute to increased flood risk. In addition, Boulder’s propensity for sudden bursts of isolated and severe storms contributes to flash flooding risk. Flooding and wildfires 
demonstrate the connections between Boulder’s natural environment, climate change-related conditions and the interconnections between major hazards.   

BOULDER’S WATER RESOURCES
Like most western communities, Boulder depends on stored water most of the year. High streamflows from melting snowpack occur for only a few spring and summer 
months. Natural streamflows in late summer and the winter are not sufficient to meet customer demands and must be supplemented with previously stored water supplies. 
The amount of water available also changes from year to year depending on how much snow falls in the mountains. Therefore, Boulder must store water in reservoirs during 
wetter years to carry over for use in dry years. 

The city stores water in seven reservoirs and several natural lakes in the headwaters of the North Boulder Creek basin within the Silver Lake Watershed. In addition, the city 
stores water in the Barker Reservoir facilities on Middle Boulder Creek and the Boulder Reservoir northeast of Boulder. The latter is supplied through Western Slope water 
diversions that come from miles away.  

Investing in both source water protection and enhancing water infrastructure continue to be of chief importance to the city. This has included investments that secure 
additional capacity and redundancy at the city’s water treatement facilities which help reduce risk from drought and other concerns. It also includes a long history of 
investing in the city’s stormwater and wastewater systems which help mitigate flooding and sewer back-ups.

INVASIVE SPECIES ARE A MAJOR CONCERN FOR BOULDER
Boulder’s urban forest provides nearly $5.2 million in annual environmental, economic and social services benefits to the community. These services include air quality 
improvements, energy savings, stormwater runoff reduction, atmospheric CO2 reduction and aesthetic contributions to the social and economic health of the community. 
One of the largest threats faced by urban forests across the U.S. is from invasive insects and disease pests such as the Emerald Ash Borer (EAB).  EAB will cause mortality of all 
untreated ash trees in Boulder and destroy a significant portion of  urban tree canopy.

EAB is a green jewel beetle 
that feeds on ash tree species. 
The beetle originated from Asia 
and is thought to have been 
introduced to North America 
in the 1990s on solid wood 
packing material. In the U.S., 
EAB is a federally quarantined, 
invasive tree pest responsible for 
the death or decline of more than 
50 million ash trees to date.

10%

Percentage of Boulder’s ash trees 
infested with EAB in 2013. 

40%

Percentage of Boulder’s ash trees 
infested with EAB in 2016.

100% Expected percentage of Boulder’s 

untreated ash trees that will be 
infested with EAB in 2020. 

10

BOULDER IN CONTEXT

Putting It In Perspective

COMPARING HISTORICAL RAINFALL TO 2013 FLOOD

17”

September 2013
Total Rainfall

19”

Boulder’s Average 
Annual Rainfall

From Fire to Drought to Flood
Changing weather in Colorado is nothing new, but the arc of shocks 
from 2012 to 2013 offers a glimpse of the types of extreme events and 
swings that will only be exacerbated by the impacts of a warming 
climate.  A dry summer with little rainfall set up conditions for Boulder’s 
2012 Flagstaff Fire.  Drought concerns loomed larger in Boulder and 
across the state moving into 2013, only to have the year end with 
flooding and record rainfall.

The Greenways Program 
The Greenways Program divides each of the city’s 15 tributaries into 
reaches to facilitate a manageable implementation approach for 
improvements. The greenways system is maintained by the city and 
funded by the city’s Transportation Fund, Stormwater and Flood Control 
Utility Fund and the state’s Lottery Fund. Each of these funding sources 
provides $150,000 annually to 1) protect and restore riparian, floodplain 
and wetland habitat; 2) enhance water quality; 3) mitigate storm 
drainage and floods; 4) provide alternative modes of transportation 
routes or trails for pedestrians and bicyclists; 5) provide recreation 
opportunities and 6) protect cultural resources

Boulder has a history of floods including the “Big Flood” of 1894 - the largest flood on 
record. Other major floods in 1938, 1969,1995 and 2013 all reinforce the need to educate 
the public about flood safety. Each year, city staff coordinate with multiple groups to 
maximize the impact and reach of ongoing community engagement around flood outreach.

City Highlight 

City Highlight 

COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS)
The federal Community Rating System provides flood 
insurance discounts to communities that exceed the 
minimum requirements to prevent and reduce flood 
damage to insurable property.  The city’s efforts have 
earned discounted flood insurance rates for Boulder 
property owners.

CIVIC CENTER FLOOD MEMORIAL 
Gilbert F. White arguably did more to advance flood 
policy than anyone.  While his efforts had broad impacts 
advancing natural hazard research, White was a tour de 
force in Boulder.  The Gilbert F. White Memorial dedication 
monument marks the level of the 50-year, 100-year, 500-year 
and the Big Thompson floods (one of the biggest in Colorado).

While Boulder is the #1 risk for flash floods in Colorado, 
the September 2013 flood was more prolonged. All 15 of 
Boulder’s waterways flooded at the same time.  In just one 
week, Boulder received about the same amount of rain it 
normally gets in a full year.

12

BOULDER IN CONTEXT

40%

OF 1,000 TECH COMPANIES 
STARTED IN COLORADO SINCE 
2000, NEARLY HALF HAVE 
BEEN IN BOULDER COUNTY

Boulder is nationally-recognized for its quality of life, thriving tech- and research-based 
economy and booming real estate market. In addition, Boulder has become a hub of 
entrepreneurship in the U.S., particularly for businesses that value the lifestyle that is rooted 
in a love of the outdoors, healthy living and access to tech resources. We have a robust and 
diverse economy defined by the research and institutional sector. Over the past 10 to 15 
years, the tech industry has experienced pronounced growth throughout Boulder County. 

“If you look at a 
lot of the green 
technology and 
the systems we’re 
implementing, 
they’re coming 
from Boulder.”

- Robert F. Kennedy Jr. 
Speaking at the June 12, 2013 
BizWest, Boulder Earth Conference 

14

BOULDER IN CONTEXT

Owing to the presence of the University of Colorado’s (CU) flagship campus in Boulder, the city maintains 
a relatively high proportion of young people. With a current enrollment of just under 30,000 students, 
CU accounts for approximately 29 percent of the total population. Boulder is also one of the most 
educated metropolitan areas in the country. The presence of the university and 17 federally-funded 
research labs support many of the jobs for this demographic including those that focus on weather, 
climate and geophysical research. Furthermore, this segment of the workforce is supported by the 
presence of tech jobs that draw from and attract scientists and engineers.

Regional Resilience
Boulder is part of a larger community and region, and, just as the shocks and stresses we face do not simply start at the 
borders, neither do the actions and partnerships necessary to address them. Even as recent disasters have motivated 
Boulder’s own resilience building efforts, they have also spurred action at the county, state and national levels. Boulder has 
developed a strong network of partnerships that have helped inform activities and strategies, and it regularly participates 
in the collaborative development of this emerging field.
BoCo Strong 
BoCo Strong is a countywide resilience hub that creates and supports collaborative relationships between individuals, 
communities, nonprofits, governments and businesses. BoCo Strong increases the web of connections among individuals, 
organizations and governments across Boulder County to foster inclusivity, increase disaster resilience and build vibrant 
and prosperous communities. Its vision is that all Boulder communities will have access to the resources and connections 
needed to allow all residents to adapt and thrive in the face of community stressors. From the outset, Boulder has 
recognized that the challenges we face do not start or stop at the city’s edge. Building a sustaining effort requires close 
collaboration, learning from a broad base of experience and building enduring partnerships. 

Colorado Resilience Framework
Governor John Hickenlooper adopted the Colorado Resiliency Framework in May of 2015, a first-of-its-kind statewide 
framework in the nation. The framework was developed under the leadership of the Colorado Resiliency and Recovery 
Office (CRRO) through a collaborative and inclusive process that engaged local, state, federal, non-profit and private sector 
partners, as well as individual Coloradans. The framework provides guiding principles for Colorado communities and 
concrete actions that the state commits to implement. One of the first priority strategies implemented under the 
framework was a pilot regional resiliency planning process to build and strengthen collaborative relationships locally, 
establish a unified regional vision for resilience, and put in place a coordinating framework for long-term regional resilience 
action. Starting in the summer of 2015, the CRRO partnered with some of the most heavily disaster-impacted communities 
to conduct the pilot process which utilized the state framework’s guiding principles to help facilitate a vision and identify 
strategies unique to each participating region. The Boulder County region was one of three communities to participate. 

Uniquely Boulder
GROWING UP BOULDER  
In collaboration with Resilient Boulder, Growing Up Boulder (GUB) worked with approximately 120 children and youth 
to develop their perceptions of resilience within the city. Overall, access to nature and family, friends and supportive 
networks (from school and community) help support resilience, as do activities that help young people develop skills 
and confidence (including music, arts and skateboarding). Aspects of the community that do not support resilience 
include social, environmental and economic concerns (including the need for greater care of homeless residents, 
fracking and the cost of living). Children spoke about bullying and youth spoke about cultural exclusion as aspects of 
their community that need to be addressed in the city. High school students also participated in a poetry project in 
which they described a personal moment of resilience. Many of these stories included surviving the flood, family losses 
and coping with poor family health, and the challenges of immigration/immigration status. Access to nature in 
relatively close walking space could help some of the children and youth we worked with access greater opportunities 
for restoration and resilience.

BoCo

STRONG

Boulder County Flood Commemoration
September 7th, 2014 12-4pm  |  Gateway Park, 4800 28th St 
Music, Food, Kids Activities, Story Sharing, Playback Theatre West, and more

16

APPROACH

3BOULDER’S APPROACH TO RESILIENCE

Resilience and Sustainability

Resilience and sustainability are sometimes confused with one another. Resilience is a new way of thinking about the 
community in a holistic way that adds to and deepens the way we already plan for a sustainable future. Resilience 
and sustainability represent complementary values and ways of managing urban systems. Where sustainability 
is about actively and thoughtfully managing resources to achieve environmental, social and economic goals 
that preserve or enhance Boulder’s quality of life, resilience is about anticipating the inevitable events that 
cause disruption and then developing the strategies to reduce their impacts to the greatest extent 
possible. While resilience itself is not new, 100 Resilient Cities is the first organization to use 
resilience as a systematic framework, on a global scale, for actively managing and 
prioritizing city operations and activities. 

Sometimes metaphors can help explain complex 
topics. For some, the reasons for planting street 
trees help illustrate the relationship between 
resilience and sustainability.

SUSTAINABILITY: 
• Urban heat island mitigation
• Carbon sequestration
• Cleaner air 
• Community character 
• Aesthetic value

RESILIENCE:
• Summer cooling
• Reduced storm runoff
• Species diversification
• Neighborhood identity

re·sil·ience
/r    ‘ zily   ns/
e
Boulder defines resilience as the capacity of individuals, communities, 
institutions, businesses, and systems within  a city to survive, adapt and thrive 
no matter what kinds of chronic stresses and acute shocks that may be experienced.

e

18

BOULDER’S APPROACH TO RESILIENCE

CITY RESILIENCE FRAMEWORK

The City Resilience Framework (CRF) provides a lens to understand the complexity of cities and the drivers that contribute to their resilience, and a common language that 
enables cities to share knowledge and experiences. The framework is built on four essential dimensions of urban resilience: Leadership & Strategy, Health & Wellbeing, 
Economy & Society, and Infrastructure & Environment. Each dimension contains three “drivers,” which reflect the actions cities can take to improve their resilience. 

Leadership & Strategy
The processes that promote effective leadership, inclusive 
decision-making, empowered stakeholders and integrated planning.

Health & Wellbeing: 
Everyone living and working in the city has access to what they 
need to survive and thrive.

Economy & Society 
The social and financial systems that enable urban populations to 
live peacefully and act collectively.

Infrastructure & Environment
The physical and natural systems that provide critical services and
protect and connect urban assets, enabling the flow of goods, 
services and knowledge.

ership & 
ement

d
a
e
 L
s
e
t
o
m
o
r
P

g
a
n
a
 M
e
v
i
t
c
e
f
f
E

C
o
m
m
u

n

i

c

P

r

o

v

i

d

e

s

 

R

a

t

i

o

n

 

e

l
i

&

a

 

M

b

l

e

o

 

b

i
li
t
y

  L o n g - Te r m 
t e d   P l a n ning
a
r

Meets
Basic Needs

F

s t e
o
&  I n t e
g

r

s

g

y

Empowers a Broad 
Range of Stakehold ers
Leadership & Strate

I

n

f

r

a

s

t
r
u

c
t
u
r

e & E

E

n

s

o

f 

u
r
e

C

ritic

s C
o

al S

ntinuity 
ervices 

nvironment
Provides & Enhances
Natural & Manmade 

Assets

E

Health & 

u

p

S

Livelih
plo
y

m

o

o

p

orts
d
s 

&

m

e

n
t

W

ellb

e
i

n

g

H

E

e

n

a

s

l
t

u

h

 

r

e

S

s

e

r

 

P

v

u

i

c

e
s

b

l

i

c

 

 

&
 
 
e
v
si
e
h
o

s
e
i
t
i
n
u
m
m
s C
o
d C
Promote
E c o no my & Society
e
Engag
E nsures Social Stability,
S ecurity & Justice

o m ic
rit y

Copyright ARUP

n

o
Fo s t e r s   E c
P r o s p e

The Process
 
Building resilience is as much a process as it is a set of outcomes. The process itself must 
also embody the characteristics of resilient systems and be iterative, inclusive, integrated, 
adaptive and flexible. It must allow for the constant infusion of new information and 
accommodate often unpredictable change in the community, creating the ability for 
reassessment and reprioritization of activity to address new risks and opportunities. 

From the outset, Boulder’s goal has been to do things differently. The city set off to build 
on existing efforts, but recognized the opportunity to tap into the new energy around 
the 100 Resilient Cities network. For example, the city has explored new methods for 
community engagement and ownership through the MIT Climate CoLab, harnessing the 
creative potential of the whole community, and Growing Up Boulder (GUB), giving voice 
to youth in the process.  This approach has given us the chance to position Boulder as a 
resilience testbed for new technologies, innovative partnerships and creative thinking. 

In 2014, the city initiated its first resilience assessment, ultimately leading to the creation 
of this strategy. The assessment methodology was an analysis of current efforts that 
support resilience and identified important gaps in knowledge, capacity and activity. 
However, this initial assessment process itself highlighted areas where the existing 
methodology could be augmented by new diagnostics to be incorporated in future 
resilience assessments. New elements being developed as part of Boulder’s resilience 
efforts will bring insights and depth of analysis for the continuous process of 
reflection and assessment. 

PHASE I

Strategy
Kickoff

Stakeholder
Consultation

Focus Areas
Identified

Preliminary
Resilience 
Assessment

PHASE II

Focus Areas
Diagnostic

Opportunity
Assessment

Resilience
Priorities & 
Initiatives

Resilience
Strategy

Community & Value Driven

Data & Technology Driven 

Learning with 100 Resilient Cities
Learning with 100 Resilient Cities
WHAT ARE THE PLATFORM PARTNERS?
The 100RC Platform of Partners provides member cities with a curated suite of donated tools and services, supplied by partners from the private, public, academic, 
and non-profit sectors, to support cities in their resilience-building activities. Boulder has already partnered with a number of these service providers, including 
Trimble, a company that provides geospatial technical solutions and domains to capture, measure, analyze, monitor and share built and environmental information. 

20

BOULDER’S APPROACH TO RESILIENCE

From Boulder’s 40+ year legacy of open space preservation, to pioneering commitments to climate 
action goals, the Boulder community has supported some of the most progressive resilience activities 
in the country for decades.

2010-2011
City’s Affordable 
Housing Task 
Force Report; 
Comprehensive
Housing Strategy 
first approved 
in 2000

2011
EnergySmart
Program launches;
provides home 
and business 
advice and 
incentives 
to reduce 
energy use

2013
Earth Conference
held in Boulder hosts 
Robert F. Kennedy Jr. 
and is dedicated to the 
sharing of knowledge, 
bold ideas and 
technologies to 
advance sustainable 
business practices 
regionally, nationally
and globally

2013 
City launches 
a significant 
planning effort to 
define priorities 
and goals for the 
expansion and 
preservation of 
diverse, affordable 
housing

2013
Boulder provides $20k 
to fund Supplemental 
Nutrition Assistance 
Program (SNAP), formerly 
the Food Stamp Program, 
to support low-income 
purchases of local food, 
doubling the value of 
purchases at the Boulder 
Farmer’s Market

2014 
City of Boulder 
announced as 
one of the 100 
Resilient Cities

2014
National 
Disaster 
Resilience 
Competition 
Kick Off

2015
Growing 
Up Boulder 
elementary 
students 
present to 
City Council

2015
National 
Institutes for 
Standards and 
Technology 
Community 
Resilience 
Workshop

2015
100 Resilient 
Cities 
Network 
Exchange: 
Resilient 
Land Use 
Workshop

2010
Fourmile
Canyon Fire;
utilizes staff 
from the 
Wildland Fire 
Program, which 
began in 1990

2012
Flagstaff
Fire

2012 -2013 
Drought  
Concerns;
Water 
Conservation 
Program 
began 
in 1992

2013 
Major 
flooding
causes 
significant 
damage

2013
Open Space
Tax extended 
by voters; an 
initiative started 
in 1967

2013
City Council 
adopted the 
Economic 
Sustainability 
Strategy

2014 Public 
supports 75% 
increase in 
Stormwater/Flood 
Utility rates to more 
quickly address 
flood-related 
work; utility 
efforts began 
in 1973

2014
100 Resilient 
Cities Boulder 
Kick-off 
Workshop

2014
Chief 
Resilience 
Officer Annual 
Summit 

2015
Citywide 
Perceptions 
Survey

2015
Resilience 
Assessment 
Expert 
Workshops

Since joining 100RC, the City of Boulder has increasingly 
leveraged opportunities, participated in events and utilitized 
the Chief Resilience Officer to drive community engagement.

2015 
City Council 
Study 
Sessions

2015 
Resilience 
Advisors 
Spontaneous 
Volunteers 
Training 

2015
Natural 
Hazards 
Mitigation 
Association 
Symposium  

2015
MIT Climate
CoLab Community 
Challenge 

2015
Understanding 
Risk Boulder 

2015
Climate Action Plan 
Tax extended 
by voters; an 
initiative 
started in
2007

2015
National 
Renewable 
Energy Lab 
Resilience 
Workshop

2016
Colorado 
Recovery and 
Resilience Office 
Stakeholder 
Planning
 Workshop 

2016
Boulder Talks: 
Deliberative 
Inquiry 

2016
Human 
Services
Strategy 
(Master Plan)
update begins 

2015
Update to 
Boulder 
Valley 
Comprehensive 
Plan begins

2015
State of 
Colorado
releases 
Resiliency 
Framework 

2015 
National 
Disaster 
Resilience 
Competition 
Academy

2015 
BoCoStrong 
Annual 
Summit

2015 
Resilience 
Tech 
Challenge 

2015
100 Resilient 
Cities City 
Leaders Urban 
Resilience 
Summit

2015 
Chief 
Resilience 
Officer 
Annual 
Summit

2015
Boulder sends
delegates to
Paris COP 
Convening 

2016
City launches
Climate
Commitment
Framework
draft

2016
Resilience 
by Design 
University 
Prototype 
Workshop 

2016 
USAID/ICMA 
Shimla 
City-Links 
Exchange

2016
City launches
Resilience 
Strategy 

22

STRATEGIES

4BOULDER’S STRATEGIES

THROUGH THE RESILIENCE assessment and community discussions, Boulder has identified three major resilience strategies. Working 
collaboratively to create actions that achieve these interconnected strategies will help build a resilient and adaptive community that is better able to address 
the unpredictable impacts of environmental, social and economic shocks and stresses. 

Building community resilience is a never-ending process and requires constant adjustment to new conditions and opportunities. At its heart, building community 
resilience is about social cohesion and the connections between and among people and organizations. The design and implementation of each of these strategies, 
actions and frontiers is intended to create new or amplify existing bonds to build our collective resilience, regardless of the threat we face. Through the actions 
identified here, we take steps towards meeting these goals, but as noted earlier, these are not the first steps. These new actions add to ongoing and historic efforts 
in a way that brings intentional direction toward catalyzing change across all sectors of the community. 

Strategies
The following three strategies represent the main action areas for the city:

CONNECT AND PREPARE - Prepare all segments of the community for uncertainty and disruption by encouraging community 
preparedness, creating a culture of risk awareness and personalizing resilience.

PARTNER AND INNOVATE - Capitalize on the collective problem-solving and creativity of our community 
by leveraging advances in data, research and observations to address emerging resilience challenges.

TRANSFORM AND INTEGRATE - Embed resilience into city operations and systems 
by transforming our approach to community resilience. 

Actions
These are immediate priority activities to be implemented over the next two to three years that 
take advantage of partnerships and resources catalyzed by the 100RC network and program. 
The actions being proposed are intended to be responsive to existing city priorities and bring 
a resilience lens and added value to projects and initiatives that are already underway. 
A summary table of all the proposed activities is provided at the end of this document.

Frontiers
Transformative investments in community resilience that 
currently have no models to emulate, represent extremely 
complex areas for action and/or require an extensive 
community conversation to be successful. 

24

STRATEGY ONE

CONNECT AND PREPARE

Prepare all segments of the community for uncertainty and disruption by 
encouraging community preparedness, creating a culture of risk awareness 
and personalizing resilience.

ACTIONS:
1.1 Make Resilience Accessible
        Deploy a community driven, interactive “Mobile Resilience Lab.”
1.2 Activate Volunteerism 
        Develop a volunteer community preparedness training program.
1.3 Assess Economic Strength
        Identify risks to future economic vitality.
1.4 Prepare Businesses 
        Facilitate the use of continuity planning strategies with local businesses.
1.5 Connect for Rapid Recovery
        Develop rapid post-disaster impact assessment capacity in partnership 
        with the local business community. 
1.6 Foster Artistic Engagement 
        Engage the creative power of the arts to convey and involve people in 
        complex risk and resilience themes. 

PURPOSE:
Despite several severe natural disasters over the last decade, most Boulder community 
members remain unprepared for future events. Many of the potential shocks the city 
faces require constant vigilance, a deeply personalized understanding of individual 
exposure and community risk, and an ability to act quickly in case of an emergency. 
Fundamental to preparedness is community connectivity and the ability for all 
members of the community to contribute to response and recovery when disaster 
strikes. Community connection can be as simple as knowing your neighbors, but it 
can also mean building new relationships and capacities between the city and local 
businesses. By enhancing preparedness and connection now, before the next disaster, 
the city can empower everyone to take quick action, while also deepening the city’s 
overall sense of community. 

RESILIENCE VALUE:
Preparing for future disruption is a core aspect of building community resilience. 
To address gaps in the city’s response to the 2013 flood, the city is preparing for future 
uncertainty by building robust and flexible local capacity, inclusive plans and new 
opportunities for community collaboration. 

26

STRATEGY 1 - CONNECT & PREPARE

Action 1.1  Make Resilience Accessible
Deploy a community driven, interactive “Mobile Resilience Lab.”
In partnership with BoCo Strong, the collaborative countywide resilience building organization, the City of Boulder will bring resilience and preparedness activities directly 
into neighborhoods and communities through a “Mobile Resilience Lab.”  The lab will be a highly interactive space that accommodates programming as varied as developing 
your own bee-safe garden to creating personalized blueprints for individual resilience to building disaster “go kits.” Deploying a mobile lab recognizes that true resilience 
building occurs first and foremost at home and in your own neighborhood, with the people and places you know best. The lab will provide a fun and dynamic platform for 
building relationships around preparedness and will, literally, be a vehicle for the community to share challenges and solutions. By meeting people where they are, the city 
will deepen public ownership of resiliency and seek to address community concerns about the responsiveness and transparency of government.

Action 1.2  Activate Volunteerism
Develop a volunteer community preparedness program.
A key to effective and successful disaster response is community and individual preparedness. Boulder’s formal emergency response capabilities are well-resourced and 
effective; however, local neighborhoods and communities need to be better prepared and possess a deeper capacity to be first responders while formal systems gear up for 
relief operations. The city will develop a community-centered course to enhance emergency preparedness, emphasizing social connections and risk awareness as core 
personal resilience attributes. Developing a more robust and flexible capacity to respond to crisis when it occurs is a direct outcome of lessons learned from recent disasters.

In August 2015, Boulder was selected as one of 10 cities to host the inaugural class of Resilience AmeriCorps VISTA members. 
The program was created as a response to the recommendations made by President Barack Obama’s State, Local, and Tribal 
Leaders Task Force on Climate Preparedness and Resilience. The AmeriCorps VISTAs will assist Boulder in developing and 
piloting a citizen corps disaster preparedness training initiative by partnering with 100RC network city, Wellington, New 
Zealand, and aligning these emerging efforts with deliberate ties to community volunteerism and civic ownership 
opportunities that already exist.

Action 1.3  Assess Economic Strength 
Identify risks to future economic vitality.
 
Ensuring the continuing vitality of the local economy is an essential component of long-term community resilience. The City of Boulder will incorporate an analysis of 
the local business community’s vulnerability to disruptions in core infrastructure provision, workforce availability and financial services into an update to the Economic 
Sustainability Strategy. Boulder will also explore whether there are latent vulnerabilities to larger macro-economic trends that the city can plan for proactively. Cyclical 
swings in the economy are normal and are predictable stresses whose effects can be minimized through thoughtful preparation.

Learning with 100 Resilient Cities
Learning with 100 Resilient Cities
RESILIENCY ADVISORS
During the 2013 flood, even before the rain had stopped falling, thousands of volunteers were out helping neighbors, 
friends and strangers protect their homes and clean up debris. This outpouring of assistance reflected the best of Boulder’s 
spirit and was a vital unplanned resource during the flood recovery. However, without the coordination to direct, equip 
and support these activities, volunteers can place themselves in danger and unintentionally hamper or overwhelm formal 
responses. Recognizing the need to create the capacity to welcome this energetic community support, the City of Boulder, 
the newly-formed Boulder County Volunteers Active in Disaster (VOAD) and 100 Resilient Cities Platform Partner, Resiliency 
Advisors, partnered to deliver the “Leading and Managing Community Volunteers in Disaster” workshop. During this best 
practices workshop to manage and marshal spontaneous volunteerism, participants engaged in sharing lessons learned, 
assessing future risks and resourcing mapping, as well as applying proven disaster management concepts to manage 
spontaneous volunteers. Post session, the group was provided an after action report that outlined next steps including 
a strong focus on Volunteer Reception Center training. The session was delivered by Lisa Orloff, president of Resiliency 
Advisors.

Learning with 100 Resilient Cities
Learning with 100 Resilient Cities
PARTNERSHIP WITH WELLINGTON, NEW ZEALAND
Wellington, New Zealand is a 100 Resilient Cities network city that is recognized globally for its community disaster 
preparedness program. Wellington’s approach integrates volunteerism, community-based trainings and a network of 
district disaster hubs to create a multi-tiered preparedness and response capability across their region. Wellington’s 
success rests largely on the accessibility of training courses to a wide range of community members, as well as an 
innovative approach to regularly scheduled activities that create new opportunities for community interaction with the 
program. In May 2016, experts from Wellington, NZ will visit with city staff and community organizations in a weeklong 
workshop to design and implement activities that will prepare the community for the next disaster.

28

STRATEGY 1 - CONNECT & PREPARE

Action 1.4  Prepare Businesses
Facilitate the use of continuity planning strategies with local businesses.
The sooner local businesses return to normal operations after a disaster, the faster the surrounding neighborhoods 
and city recover. We will collaborate with public and private institutions and organizations to identify best practices; 
facilitate the use of continuity plan templates and other resources; develop policies and procedures for improved 
situational awareness; coordinate between business support organizations; and communicate with businesses after 
a disaster. Ultimately it is in each organization’s interest to proactively plan for uncertainty and disruption, but our 
community at large has a clear stake in helping all businesses weather the inevitable crises and bounce back faster 
and better.

Action 1.5  Connect for Rapid Recovery
Develop rapid post-disaster impact assessment capacity in partnership 
with the local business community. 
The ability for businesses to rapidly access resources and financial assistance after a disaster is essential for the 
successful return to operations. Each day that businesses remains idle represents lost revenue, wages and taxes, 
eliminating vital infusions of financial capital just when a community needs it most. Boulder will partner with local 
businesses and associations to develop the necessary capacity, relationships and systems to quickly and efficiently 
collect impact information and data, access recovery funds and return businesses to operation after a disaster with 
minimal disruption. The city will also explore the creation of a Business Disaster Assistance Center that would 
become operational when needed. By developing a user-friendly process to address gaps in our response to the 
2013 flood, we are preparing for future uncertainty.

Action 1.6    Foster Artistic Engagement 
Engage the creative power of the arts to convey and 
involve people in complex risk and resilience themes.
Mobilizing action at a broad scale also requires varied ways of communicating complex topics so that 
they are relatable and actionable to the diverse residents that make up our community. Breaking from 
the traditional model of community engagement, we will invest in the creative talent of our visual 
artists, filmmakers, poets, theatre-makers, dancers and musicians to broaden our vision, discussion 
and experience of risk and resilience. By enhancing our collective thinking about resilience and 
exploring creative ways to communicate it, we will broaden the circle of community ownership, 
action and perspective. This effort will lead to creative insights and solutions from community 
members who might not otherwise participate.

R O NTIER

F

INVEST IN THE FUTURE
Prioritize city investments to promote community 
resilience and proactively address future risks.

The capital budgeting process is the critical intersection between 
public policy and program implementation. Given limited resources, 
city officials must choose among competing priorities. These choices 
are often significantly determined by the criteria that are used to 
prioritize and rank public expenditures. Given the relatively recent 
emergence of resilience capacity-building as a public policy priority, 
there are few formal evaluation criteria built into the capital planning 
process that provide guidance on how to weigh the costs of 
proposed actions against potential benefits. This is essential to 
enable systematic consideration of proposed resilience actions 
and measures against other priorities. 

Currently, for example, city investments and budgets do not 
specifically consider likely climate impact on city systems, nor are 
there mechanisms for internalizing the cost implications of the city’s 
commitment to a zero-carbon energy policy. It is important to have 
valuation mechanisms that evaluate the potential cost of carbon 
and the potential for future constraints on carbon emissions. 
Implementing climate risk screening mechanisms in the Capital 
Improvement Program or internalizing the carbon cost of projects 
will reprioritize budgets and drive new conversations about risk 
and resilience tradeoffs across the entire city organization. 

30

Uniquely Boulder

Uniquely Boulder
YOUTH “SHINE” IN PERFORMANCE FOR RESILIENCE
Performance can be a dynamic tool for including youth 
participation in authoring our city’s plan for resilience. Shine is 
a musical performance that weaves climate science and artist 
expression into a funny and powerful story that spans 300 million 
years of geological time to convey how humanity and climate 
are interrelated. Performed at NCAR in Boulder in June 2015 as 
a collaboration between NCAR scientists, Beth Osnes at CU and 
Boulder’s youth, rehearsing each part of the musical led participants 
through different aspects of climate science, from dancing 
the various phases of 
photosynthesis to creating 
flags to representing the ways 
in which our city utilizes fossil 
fuels. This show has gone on 
to engage youth in other 
100 Resilient Cities, including 
New York City and London, 
with Durban, South Africa and 
New Orleans to come.

STRATEGY TWO

PARTNER AND INNOVATE

Capitalize on the collective problem solving and creativity of Boulder’s community 
by leveraging advances in data, research and observations to address emerging 
resilience challenges.  

ACTIONS:
2.1 Put Science in the Hands of the Community
        Create a “citizen science” program to foster the co-creation of knowledge.
2.2 Ensure the Resilience of the Local Food System
        Design and conduct a local food system assessment.
2.3 Make Data Accessible to All 
        Spur creative representation of data through investments in artistic 
        visualization and knowledge display. 
2.4 Crowd Source Solutions
        Drive the creative use of community data through competitive 
        challenges and hackathons.

PURPOSE:
In order to make the most informed decisions about the future, Boulder needs a better 
understanding of the changes taking place around us.  The city must develop the 
ability to anticipate changes to proactively address emerging challenges. Rapid 
evolutions in remote sensing, data architecture and mobile technology now allow us 
to design integrated monitoring and observations systems to create new insights into 
the world and community. By using the power of people and place, tapping into vast 
research and educational resources, the city will develop the data, observation systems 
and partnerships necessary to understand and predict forces of change across social, 
economic and environmental factors, as well as create new opportunities for 
engagement from a wide range of stakeholders. 

RESILIENCE VALUE:
The complex issues which the Boulder community faces lack easy or obvious 
solutions. By developing mechanisms and partnerships for inclusive and collective 
problem-solving, Boulder can elicit novel and innovative answers from a broad 
pool of expertise, creativity and talent.

32

STRATEGY 2 - PARTNER & INNOVATE

Action 2.1  Put Science in the Hands of the Community 
Create a “citizen science” program to foster the co-creation of knowledge.
Citizen science can take many forms, but as technologies have advanced over the last decade, each member of the community can now serve as independent, 
mobile data-collecting participants. To harness this potential, the city will develop the information architecture necessary to support community-driven mobile science 
applications and translate that data into information and metrics to inform city decision-making. The aggregation of information from so many data points can create new 
insights into changes in the community, collective behavior or climate, as examples. By relying on community members to play a role in the creation of data and shared 
knowledge, Boulder will foster co-ownership in understanding the factors of change affecting us all. The underlying architecture will be openly available to the public to 
creatively develop applications to support data collection from sources as diverse as the Boulder Valley School District to Boulder’s active and enthusiastic outdoor 
community.

Action 2.2  Ensure the Resilience of the Local Food System 
Design and conduct a local food system assessment. 
Boulder’s passion for safe, local and ethical food has made the community a global hub for natural foods. 
As a leader in the natural and organic industry, Boulder has world-class, locally sourced restaurants and has made 
revolutionary contributions to natural food packaging and labeling. However, Boulder needs a better understanding 
of what role locally produced food can play in buffering the community from a disruption in national or global 
food or transportation systems. The city will conduct an entirely new food security assessment, deviating from
traditional scales of analysis and definitions of “security.” An assessment of this type will require a broad range of 
partnerships from the business, agricultural, transportation and water sectors, among others, to understand how 
changes in the complex dynamics of the food production, delivery and consumption system can both be impacted 
by disruption, but also meaningfully mitigated by local action. 

Action 2.3  Make Data Accessible to All
Spur creative representation of data through artistic visualization and knowledge display. 
New capabilities created by the integration of enhanced computational power, big data and visual representation systems 
provide the opportunity to bring many previously complex and abstract concepts into stunning visual relief for the first time. 
The city will convene some of the world’s great artists and media professionals to work with scientists, librarians and city 
officials to develop and refine some of these data visualization systems to create a compelling community education and 
communication approach. Boulder will work with partners to put the vast amount of collected scientific and citizen science 
data in the hands of artists and hackers, giving them the tools they need to interpret and represent the data in a clear, 
resonant message. An emphasis will be placed on creating a variety of pathways, tools and systems to enhance accessibility to 
a wide an array of prospective users. Through these creative partnerships, the city will unleash untapped knowledge to inform 
decisions and mobilize collective action

Action 2.4    Crowd Source Solutions 
Drive the creative use of community data through competitive challenges and hackathons.
As part of an ongoing effort to democratize the city’s data through community dashboarding and a more accessible open-data portal, Boulder will create data and 
technology challenges to encourage the use of city and community data. These challenges are dynamic competitions intended to focus the creative and entrepreneurial 
talent of the city to help identify and solve collective problems. Similarly, the city will partner with the local coding and tech community to host hackathons—events that 
focus intense programming attention toward a collaborative solution to a single, discrete issue. Taken together, this approach taps into two powerful behavioral 
motivators—competition and collaboration  —to find solutions to particularly complex resilience issues. 

Uniquely Boulder
UNDERSTANDING RISK: BOULDER
In October 2015, the City of Boulder, in partnership with Ushahidi, a 100 Resilient Cities Platform Partner, the University of Colorado, the World Bank’s Global Facility for 
Disaster Risk Reduction (GFDRR) and several local technology companies, hosted a two-day event called Understanding Risk Boulder (URBoulder). URBoulder convened 
the talent and expertise of the region’s communities, scientists, technologists and government to develop a shared understanding of the challenges faced in building 
long-term resilience to natural hazards; understand the impacts of climate change; and develop innovative solutions to meet them. 

In conjunction with UR Boulder, Ushahidi hosted a Tech Challenge that sought to use open-source technology to improve resilience in Boulder and strengthen 
community engagement. The UR Boulder Tech Challenge was designed to identify technological gaps in the resilience landscape of Boulder and provide seed 
funding for innovate solutions to them. The challenge was funded by The Rockefeller Foundation.

34

STRATEGY 2 - PARTNER & INNOVATE

“With an estimated 2.8 million visitor nights in 2013, the tourism industry contributed to an 
estimated $420 million total economic impact on the City of Boulder. The industry is supported by 
the area’s scenic beauty and recreational opportunities, variety of entertainment and attractions, 
support for arts and culture, and broad range of dining, shopping and lodging options.”

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

- BOULDER ECONOMIC COUNCIL

“We are working on a wide array of policies, 
programs and projects to reduce emissions 
and realize other important community 
outcomes. We know that long-term success 
will require better feedback loops, honest 
assessment, persistence and collective action.”

- City of Boulder’s  2016 
  Climate Commitment Framework

R O NTIER

F

ENVISION THE FUTURE OF ENERGY
Develop a sustainable, secure and equitable energy system.

Extreme weather events have created a call to action for deploying 
more resilient power systems. Communities face a growing number of 
stresses that pose risks to their energy systems and economies. These 
include aging infrastructure in need of costly maintenance upgrades and 
severe weather events. Energy efficiency and local power generation are 
strategies that enhance the resilience of energy systems and the 
communities they serve. 

Boulder is committed to transitioning to a no-carbon energy system 
as part of its climate action plan. This wholesale transformation will 
fundamentally alter the landscape of energy production, storage, 
distribution and use in ways that are only now being fully explored. With 
this transition comes an additional opportunity—a chance to apply core 
resilience principles, such as flexibility, redundancy and robustness, as 
additional drivers of the system design. Many of the renewable energy 
sources we rely on as part of our strategies for reducing carbon are well 
suited to serve as the backbone for a resilient energy system. 

The city aims to improve resiliency and address economic and 
environmental concerns by prioritizing a local, clean energy system 
that combines Boulder-based generation, integrated storage and other 
distributed energy resources, increasing clean energy opportunities to 
low-income communities and protecting vulnerable populations by 
serving critical power needs. It will require careful consideration and 
extensive design, partnerships that span the entire community, and, 
ultimately, a collective leap of faith and the willingness to embrace 
change, even when the outcome is not yet entirely clear.

36

STRATEGY THREE

TRANSFORM AND INTEGRATE

Embed resilience into city operations and systems to transform Boulder’s approach to 
community resilience.

ACTIONS:
3.1 Create Community Resilience Centers
        Ensure the continuity of all critical life-safety services at a network of 
        community resilience centers. 
3.2 Foster Climate Readiness 
        Build climate preparedness capacity across the city organization. 
3.3 Advance Sustainability with Resilience
        Integrate resilience principles into Boulder’s Sustainability Framework.
3.4 Embed Resilience in the Comprehensive Plan
        Integrate resilience into the Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan.
3.5 Manage Thriving Ecosystems
        Develop an integrated approach to managing ecosystems and green 
        infrastructure. 

PURPOSE:
The city’s infrastructure, design and neighborhoods are driven by  public investments 
and land use decisions. Choices made today will last for generations. These choices 
also must be considered on multiple scales and across issues and systems. Facing a 
future with so much uncertainty will ultimately require flexible and adaptive systems 
that do not lock the Boulder community into a single pathway. 

RESILIENCE VALUE: 
Embedding resilience into long-held sustainability values creates systemic change for 
both the city and the larger community that allows us to better address a wide range 
of climate, economic and social challenges.

38

STRATEGY 3 - TRANSFORM & INTEGRATE

Action 3.1  Create Community Resilience Centers
Ensure the continuity of all critical life-safety services at a network of community resilience centers. 
Recent events have highlighted the extreme vulnerabilities and interdependencies of core life-safety infrastructure and utilities (e.g. energy, water and sanitation) and the 
need for their combined secure, continuous operation during crisis. Advance planning for large-scale, high-impact events is critical to ensuring that these incidents do not 
overwhelm either immediate response capabilities or the long-term well-being of highly vulnerable segments of Boulder’s community. The city will design and implement a 
communitywide network of resilience centers that ensures continuity of critical community services, protection for high-risk populations and infrastructure, and an 
enhanced capacity to provide and maintain basic services at a neighborhood scale, and develop the capacity to ‘island’ critical infrastructure provision without jeopardizing 
core life-safety functions. These resilience centers will contain small-scale or compartmentalized infrastructure systems that can operate independent of the larger utility 
system to sustain a sheltering facility during wide-scale disruption.

Boulder will also create place-based platforms for assembly, cooperation and education. By basing and delivering community outreach, activities and other functions (e.g., 
mobile farmers markets, food trucks, fix it clinics, recycling support, etc.) from these locations, these centers can be integrated into the new focus on neighborhood- based 
engagement during good times as well as crisis. The likely integration of significant renewable energy assets at these locations can also provide foundational elements for a 
distributed energy system that could include neighborhood-based load balancing through on-site battery storage, neighborhood microgrid development or other emerging 
decentralized energy utility models.

By thoughtfully investing in public safety infrastructure as a response to lessons learned in previous events, the city can weave in multiple additional community benefits 
such as neighborhood development and energy transition. 
 
Action 3.2  Foster Climate Readiness
Build climate preparedness capacity across the city organization. 
Most of the city’s climate risk is tied to larger scale changes in the global and regional climate, and the community’s understanding of those impacts at the local scale is 
inconsistent. This is in part because of the complexities of Boulder’s local topography, but also because the city currently uses a wide variety of models, methods and 
analysis to characterize potential “futures.”  In order to efficiently and effectively plan for Boulder’s future climate impacts, the city will systematize the use of climate 
information across all departments and city functions in a way that is scientifically robust yet retains appropriate flexibility. 

CLIMATE LEADERS PROGRAM
The City of Boulder will pilot a program to train department leaders, from Human Resources and Finance to 
Utilities and Parks and Recreation, in the science of climate change so that everyday decisions across 
the organization can be informed by a consistent foundation of knowledge and understanding.

SCENARIO PLANNING
We must prepare to accommodate a much wider range of possible future environmental, social and 
economic conditions than in the past. Part of the solution is to design a scenario-based process for 
planning that allows us to test programs, actions and investments against different plausible potential
future conditions and prioritize actions that represent “no or low regrets” strategies. “No or low regrets” 
strategies are those that are sound investments and adaptations regardless of the severity of future change. 

By investing in the core capacity of city staff to understand climate science and impacts, and by developing flexible mechanisms to plan for a range of potential climate 
impacts, Boulder is creating the adaptive governance structures necessary to address the wide-ranging effects that climate change will have on all functions of government.

Action 3.3  Advance Sustainability with Resilience
Integrate resilience principles into Boulder’s Sustainability Framework. 
Boulder’s Sustainability Framework is the unifying mechanism that connects all of the city’s policies and programs, and therefore represents the best point for integrating the 
resilience principles that will have the greatest impact across all of Boulder’s departments and functions. The Sustainability Framework has been used successfully in practice 
for several years, informing the city’s policies, budget prioritization and program design. The Boulder community has a deeply embedded sense of sustainability as a core 
value system, manifested through the well-established framework, among many other community-driven initiatives. Resilience, however, is a relatively new and emerging 
concept being systematically applied as a practice in cities for the first time. By thoughtfully integrating resilience into a familiar and operational framework, 
resilience activity will be placed in a relatable and immediately actionable context. 

The city is continuously working to provide service 
excellence for an inspired future and moving towards 
the vision of One City, One Boulder. 

Action 3.4   Embed Resilience in the Comprehensive Plan
Integrate resilience into the Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan.
The Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan (BVCP) serves as the city’s highest level policy document, articulating the 
community’s vision and core values.  The BVCP contains sustainability principles and policies and chapters that convey 
discrete topics such as land use, transportation, housing and economy.  By integrating new resilience policies and strategies 
into the BVCP, the plan can address key elements of a healthy, stable and adaptive community, reflect and address Boulder’s 
highest risks so the community can be adaptive, underscore connectively between systems and vulnerabilities, and illustrate 
ways that the BVCP can address Boulder’s resilience, not only in times of disruption and crisis, but also on a day-to-day basis 
and over the long term.  Integrating resilience into the BVCP will leverage interdisciplinary expertise and generate strategies 
that are responsive to Boulder’s challenges, as well as align activities and priorities across city departments. 

40

STRATEGY 3 -  TRANSFORM & INTEGRATE

Action 3.5  Manage Thriving Ecosystems
Develop an integrated approach to managing ecosystems and green infrastructure. 
By creating an integrated management plan, Boulder will support its complex local ecosystem and plan for the systemic stresses and changes anticipated with climate 
change impacts. As part of Boulder’s long history of progressive planning, the city actively manages many aspects of the ecosystem, including monitoring wildlife-human 
interactions, maintaining a healthy forest canopy and conducting regular riparian renewal and restoration efforts. The success of these programs contributes to the city’s rich 
quality of life and sense of community. These programs also add to the ongoing success of Boulder’s signature planning achievement—the vast greenbelt of open space that 
encircles the city. Building on these efforts, Boulder will develop an integrated strategy that aims to knit disparate efforts to create a single management plan that will 
evaluate new opportunities and maximize value around existing and future green infrastructure planning initiatives.  

Learning with 100 Resilient Cities

TRIMBLE AND DIGITALGLOBE
Boulder’s urban forest faces unique challenges due to both the higher stresses already caused by geographic conditions and the onset of diseases and exotic pests such 
as the recently arrived Emerald Ash Borer (EAB). Given these factors and the need to develop a more robust set of urban forest management tools, the City of Boulder 
partnered with 100RC Platform Partners Trimble and DigitalGlobe to map the urban tree canopy. 

DigitalGlobe was able to provide Boulder with the high-resolution multi-spectral satellite imagery needed to extract, map, and measure the trees throughout the city. 
Trimble presented an initial citywide urban tree canopy analysis, as well as provided free training to city staff on the use of the eCognition software necessary to map 
changes to the urban tree canopy over time. 

The result provided the city with a baseline to prioritize future management plans and track green infrastructure changes whether through loss due to EAB infestation or 
gain through green infrastructure improvements. The urban tree canopy analysis will be published in Boulder’s Open Data Catalog. In addition to working with Boulder, 
Trimble and DigitalGlobe are assessing how to replicate and offer similar outcomes to other municipalities based on the work done and lessons learned with Boulder.

The 18-month “Tree Debris to Opportunity” project (see pg 42) aims to transform Emerald 
Ash Borer infested wood debris into items area residents can use. In partnership with the 
Bridge House Ready to Work program, participants will receive expert training to turn milled 
wood into practical items and artistic expressions at the new Building 61 Makerspace at the 
Boulder Main Library.

R O NTIER

F

CREATE ADAPTIVE SOCIAL SERVICES
Reduce homelessness by designing an adaptive 
and predictive social service network.

Human Services provides vital support for large segments of the Boulder 
community through grants to community agencies, direct services and 
community capacity-building partnerships. These programs provide a 
range of community services for vulnerable residents—from access to 
mental and physical health, child care and family support to emergency 
services. The 2016 revision to the Human Services Strategy seeks to shift 
how Human Services conducts business, away from primarily tracking 
program-based success metrics, such as the number of shelter beds filled 
or meals served, to a predictive and adaptive service provision based 
on achieving social outcomes. This shift will allow us to identify “tipping 
points” in the social safety net that cause individuals and families to move 
from relative stability into homelessness. It will allow us to monitor for 
those changes and preemptively adjust resources to avoid them. 

Homelessness represents a profound threshold for the most vulnerable 
in our society and once crossed, individuals and families encounter 
significantly more social, economic and health barriers. Reducing 
homelessness not only brings obvious and important benefits for 
the individuals and families involved, but ultimately saves substantial 
resources in the social safety net that can be redirected toward 
additional positive investments. Boulder is a prosperous and innovative 
city, and it has pioneered many important cultural and environmental 
issues. Thus, developing new ways to assist residents with the greatest 
needs, so that no one falls into homelessness, is a resilience frontier. 

42

Uniquely Boulder
Uniquely Boulder

Uniquely Boulder 
TRAINING THE HOMELESS TO TURN 
“TREE DEBRIS TO OPPORTUNITY”
The City of Boulder has won a prestigious Knight Cities Challenge 
grant to develop an innovative program that will train homeless 
community members to turn trees impacted by Emerald Ash Borer 
into beautiful products.  This 18-month project addresses a variety 
of community challenges, including Emerald Ash Borer infestation 
and homelessness. The program, called Tree Debris to Opportunity, 
was one of 37 recipients chosen by the Knight Cities Challenge for 
support and funding. The city’s application was submitted in 
partnership with the Bridge House and Library Maker Space. 

The goal is to engage the Boulder community in repurposing Ash 
tree debris to usable products to be sold back to the community. 
The program will hire participants of the Bridge House Ready to 
Work program. These individuals will complete a multi-month 
apprenticeship at the Maker Space, located in the Main Library, to 
learn how to become woodworkers. The group will make products 
that will then be sold at the Farmers Market and other locations. 
Public classes will also be offered for free. The Bridge House 
participants will help teach and facilitate the classes, encouraging 
collaboration between all members of the community.  The project 
is expected to begin in mid- to late summer and is made possible 
through the generous support of the Knight Cities Challenge. The 
grant amount totals $200,000.
 

A RUNNING 
START

The actions listed to the right showcase many of the resilience activities the city is currently undertaking across the community. Boulder 
has taken inspiration and learned from its successes in the design of the new actions proposed earlier in this strategy. However, the list 
is not comprehensive – Boulder is doing much more. Let us know what you, your organization or company is already doing to build 
community resilience at www.resilientboulder.com  Add to the ever-growing list of resilience building projects, programs and activities!

2016-2017 Resilience Actions
Strategy 1: CONNECT AND PREPARE
Prepare all segments of the community for uncertainty and disruption by encouraging community preparedness, creating a culture of risk awareness, and personalizing resilience.
1.1 Make Resilience Accessible: Deploy a community driven, interactive “Mobile 
       Resilience Lab.” 
1.2 Activate Volunteerism: Develop a volunteer community preparedness training 
       program.
1.3 Assess Economic Strength: Identify risks to future economic vitality. 

City of Boulder Fire Rescue’s Citizen’s Fire Academy

City of Boulder’s Economic Sustainability Strategy

Resilience Challenge Area

Boulder’s Running Start

NEW!

NEW!

NEW!

Boulder’s Community Cultural Plan

Boulder Office of Emergency Management

City of Boulder Capital Improvements Program

1.4 Prepare Businesses: Incentivize the use of continuity planning strategies with 
       local businesses.
1.5 Connect for Rapid Recovery: Develop rapid post-disaster impact assessment 
       capacity in partnership with the local business community.
1.6 Foster Artistic Engagement: Engage the creative power of the arts to convey 
       and involve people in complex risk and resilience themes.
FRONTIER 1: Invest in the Future: Prioritize city investments to promote community 
                         resilience and proactively address future risks.
Strategy 2: PARTNER AND INNOVATE
Capitalize on the collective problem solving and creativity of Boulder’s community by leveraging advances in data, research and observations to address emerging resilience challenges.  
2.1 Put Science in the Hands of the Community: Create a “citizen science” program 
       to foster the co-creation of knowledge.
2.2 Ensure the Resilience of the Local Food System: Design and conduct a local food
       system assessment.
2.3 Make Data Accessible to All: Spur creative representation of data through 
       investments in artistic visualization and knowledge display.
2.4 Crowd Source Solutions: Drive the creative use of community data through 
       competitive challenges and hackathons.
FRONTIER 2: Envision the Future of Energy:  Develop a sustainable, secure, and 
                         equitable energy system.
Strategy 3: TRANSFORM AND INTEGRATE
Embed resilience into city operations and systems to transform Boulder’s approach to community resilience.
3.1 Create Community Resilience Centers: Ensure the continuity of all critical 
       life-safety services at a network of community resilience centers.
3.2 Foster Climate Readiness: Build climate preparedness capacity across the 
       city organization.
3.3 Advance Sustainability with Resilience: Integrate resilience principles into 
       Boulder’s Sustainability Framework.
3.4 Embed Resilience in the Comprehensive Plan: Integrate resilience into the 
       Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan (BVCP).
3.5 Manage Thriving Ecosystems: Develop an integrated approach to managing
       ecosystems and green infrastructure. 
FRONTIER 3: Create Adaptive Social Services: Reduce homelessness by designing 
                         an adaptive and predictive social service network.

Bold Measures, Boulder’s Community Dashboard (Coming Soon!)

City of Boulder’s Urban Forest Strategic Plan

Our Legacy. Our Future. BVCP 2015 Update

City of Boulder’s Human Services Strategy

City of Boulder’s Climate Commitment

City of Boulder’s Local Foods Initiative

Boulder’s Sustainability Framework

City of Boulder’s Energy Future

Understanding Risk Boulder

Colorado’s Water Plan - Chapter 6, Water Supply Management for the Future

44

CREDITS

5ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Resilient Boulder would like to thank the many partners that contributed to Boulder’s Resilience Strategy. Most importantly, we thank the thousands of community 
members who participated in workshops, surveys and conversations and provided boundless energy, creativity and insights during the strategy process. 

The city would like to extend a very special thanks to the tremendous support provided by the team at 100 Resilient Cities, including Michael Berkowitz, Bryna Lipper, 
Andrew Salkin, Amy Armstrong, Leah Flax, Corinne LeTourneau, Katherine Michonski, Paul Nelson, David Schreiner, Roya Shariat, Max Young and the rest of the team. 
The success of this effort and partnership, however, would not have been possible without the immeasurable contributions of Katya Sienkiewicz. 

Finally, we offer our sincere thanks and appreciation to our 100RC platform and strategy partners listed below.

STRATEGY PARTNER:

HR&A Advisors

100RC PLATFORM PARTNERS:

AGU Thriving Earth Exchange
Climate CoLab
DigitalGlobe 
Earth Economics
Resiliency Advisors LLC
Trimble
Ushahidi

PICTURES OFAPPEAR IN COURTESY OF:
PHOTO CREDITS:

Pg. 03, Full Page 
Pg. 10, Top Left 
Pg. 10, Top Right 
Pg. 10, Middle Left 
Pg. 11, Full Page 

Nate Paradiso, Open Space & Mountain Parks Photo Contest
George Karakehian Collection
George Karakehian Collection
The Sink
Earth Observatory, NASA

Pg. 15, Full Page 
Pg. 31, Middle 
Pg. 37, Full Page 
Pg. 38, Bottom  
Pg. 45, Full Page 

University of Colorado Sports Video & Athletics
Walk My Path in Class 18- AmeriCorps NCCC
Downtown Boulder (DBI.org)
UR Boulder 
Austin Baily, Open Space & Mountain Parks Photo Contest

46

Resilient

boulder

Printed on 100% post-consumer recycled paper.

