* 

Juarez 

Milan * New York City * Quito
Melbourne *  Rome *  Thessaloniki 
R o t t e r d a m  *  A t h e n s  *  P a r i s
Dakar 
*  Boston
Dallas * Vejle  *  Norfolk, Virginia
Medellín  *  Bangkok  *  Rio  de
Janeiro * Barcelona * Los Angeles 
Rome  *  Chicago  *  Da  Nang 
New  Orleans  * Kigali  * Huangshi
Singapore * Lisbon * Mexico City
Cali * Santiago de los Caballeros 
Belgrade  *  Ramallah  *  Glasgow  
Montreal  *  Mandalay  *  Accra 
London  *  El  Paso  *    Bangalore
Surat  *  Jacksonville  *  San  Juan
Durban  *  Sydney  *  Pittsburgh
Amman  *  Semarang  *  Enugu 
Porto  Alegre  *  San  Francisco
Deyang * Santiago, Metropolitan 
Region  *  Ashkelon  *  Wellington 
City * St. Louis * Toyama * Byblos 
Arusha  *  Christchurch  *  Tulsa
Chennai  *  Oakland  *  Bristol
Santa  Fe  *  Berkeley  *  Boulder

4

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYThe City of Norfolk is a model of resilience. Through four centuries we have withstood disruptions, 
weathered storms, and survived wars and pandemics. Time and time again, we have come back stronger. 
Today our city is home to the largest naval station in the world, the third largest port on the East Coast, 
and NATO’s Allied Command. Norfolk is a historic tourist destination and the urban core of Hampton 
Roads —the commercial, cultural, and educational hub for a region of 1.7 million residents.
Our evolutionary success comes from the people who make Norfolk home. We are and have always 
been a city of makers and doers, people and organizations who work together to help Norfolk 
survive, adapt, and grow, no matter the environmental, economic, and social stresses and shocks we 
experience. Resilience is in our DNA! 
We take great pride in the world’s recognition of our resilient reputation with the designation of 
Norfolk as one of the first resilient cities in The 100 Resilient Cities (100RC) network, a program 
pioneered by The Rockefeller Foundation. We are humbled to be part of this international group, 
which includes Paris, Milan, Rio de Janeiro, Lisbon, Melbourne, Glasgow, Sydney, Barcelona, Rome, 
Montreal, San Francisco, and other world-class cities. It’s more than an honor; it’s an amazing 
opportunity to connect with global experts and innovators. Through this international initiative, cities 
are identifying, sharing, and institutionalizing innovative resilience practices that will ultimately inspire 
and support thousands of cities around the world.
As a member of 100RC, we have developed our own resilience strategy to address the three major 
challenges facing our city today: sea level rise and recurrent flooding; a shifting economy; and a need 
to build strong, healthy neighborhoods. 
This document presents the initial direction of our city’s resilience strategy. First and foremost, our 
strategy formally honors Norfolk’s catalytic resilience leaders who have spearheaded much of the 
important work already underway. Throughout the document, we recognize many of our citizens as 
Resilient City Builders for their individual and organizational work connecting, sharing, and building 
Norfolk’s resilience capacity. 
Second, our strategy makes connections between people, places, ideas, and systems. For example, 
solutions to flooding can positively drive economic activity; innovative water management practices 
can be used to reconnect neighborhoods and drive economic vitality; and networks designed to 
ensure citizen safety during disruptive events can build neighborhood cohesion when the skies are 
blue. In short, our strategy views the city’s challenges as opportunities to change in resilient ways. 
Third, our strategy begins the process of formally identifying and articulating the values, processes, 
and common language that will enable and inspire more people and organizations to engage and 
participate in building a more resilient Norfolk. 
The challenges ahead call for more people and organizations to join our resilience efforts. By working 
together as a community, leveraging expertise and resources available through 100RC, and creating a 
formal and intentional resilience plan, we will continue to thrive at sea level. 
Please join us as we show the world why Norfolk has been and will always be America’s most 
dynamic and authentic urban waterfront community.

Sincerely,

   Paul D. Fraim
   Mayor

5

The launch of Norfolk’s resilience strategy marks an important milestone: a year of research, 
stakeholder engagement, community outreach, and thoughtful planning. This hard work has now 
culminated in this impressive document, detailing the strategic goals, integrated solutions, creative 
partnerships, and action steps that will ensure Norfolk’s resilience strategy has a positive impact on 
the city for generations to come. 
Through Norfolk’s resilience strategy, the city is embracing its challenges head-on: sea level rise 
and recurrent flooding; a shifting economy; and a need to build strong, healthy neighborhoods. It 
is identifying, orienting, and leveraging a variety of existing and new public and private partners to 
tackle these challenges. This not only includes incorporating the resilience work already in motion, 
but also enhancing the resilience benefits of these efforts. It also includes identifying and cultivating 
new collaborative efforts that build on the city’s history of innovation and reinvention. Ultimately, all 
of this work will make Norfolk more resilient to the physical, social, and economic challenges of the 
twenty-first century, while also making the city better in good times for all of its citizens and visitors.
The creation of Norfolk’s formal resilience strategy has helped raise awareness around the 
Hampton Roads region of the overall practice and value of city resilience planning. This, in turn, has 
reinforced Norfolk’s regional leadership role. Norfolk’s resilience planning has also put the city at 
the cutting edge of urban innovation nationwide—which is especially important as Norfolk plays 
such a major role in the nation’s economy and national security. Norfolk’s resilience work is having 
an impact far beyond America, too. Norfolk was one of the first members of 100 Resilient Cities 
(100RC), and has been helping us build a global practice ever since. In addition to cities, the practice 
of resilience planning is also being embraced worldwide by the private sector, national governments, 
and non-governmental organizations.
All of this is why the launch of Norfolk’s resilience strategy is so exciting for both Norfolk and 
100RC. We are looking forward to continuing our close partnership with Norfolk as the city begins 
implementing its resilience strategy. While only time will tell how much of an impact our partnership 
will make locally and globally, the one thing we now know for certain is that we couldn’t have 
asked for a better start, more thoughtful local leaders, or a more engaged community to begin this 
important work.
Thank you Norfolk!

Sincerely,

Michael Berkowitz
President, 100 Resilient Cities

6

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITY7

Table of Contents

Introduction 

Norfolk: Past, Present, and Future 

NORFOLK’S RESILIENCE STRATEGY
Guiding Tenets 
Planning Process 
Framework 

GOAL 1: Design the Coastal Community of the Future   

GOAL 2: Create Economic Opportunity by Advancing Efforts to Grow 
Existing Industries and New Sectors  

GOAL 3: Advance Initiatives to Connect Communities, Deconcentrate Poverty,
and Strengthen Neighborhoods   

What’s Next 
Norfolk 100RC Initiative Leadership 
Acknowledgements 
References 

 

8

10

12

22
24
26
28

36

46

52
54
55
56

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYNEON Festival, Norfolk Arts District
We Can Create What We Can Imagine
by Esteban del Valle and Julia Rogers

9

Introduction

The City of Norfolk  has been a resilient 
city for over 400 years. So we take great 
pride in recently being selected as one of 
the first members of 100 Resilient Cities 
(100RC), a program pioneered by The 
Rockefeller Foundation. We are humbled 
to be part of this international group that 
includes Paris, Milan, Rio de Janeiro, Lisbon, 
Melbourne, Glasgow, Sydney, Barcelona, 
Rome, Montreal, San Francisco, and other 
world-class cities.
100RC is dedicated to helping cities 
around the world become more resilient 
to the physical, social and economic 
challenges that are a growing part of 
the 21st century by partnering directly 
with member cities to understand their 
resilience challenges and collaboratively 
build solutions. 
100RC supports the adoption and 
incorporation of a view of resilience that 
includes not just the shocks—earthquakes, 
fires, floods, etc.—but also the stresses that 
weaken the fabric of a city on a day to day 
or cyclical basis. Examples of these stresses 

include high unemployment; an overtaxed 
or inefficient public transportation system; 
endemic violence; or chronic food and 
water shortages. By addressing both the 
shocks and the stresses, a city becomes 
more able to respond to adverse events, 
and improves its ability to deliver basic 
functions to all populations in both good 
times and bad.
100RC’s vision is not only to help 
individual member cities become more 
resilient, but also facilitate the building of a 
global practice of urban resilience among 
governments, NGOs, the private sector, 
and individual citizens. To advance that goal, 
100RC provides several types of support:  
funding for a Chief Resilience Officer 
in each member city to lead resilience 
efforts; resources and technical assistance 
to develop a robust resilience strategy; 
membership in a global network of peer 
cities to share best practices and build the 
field; and access to a variety of resilience 
tools, services and expertise through a 
series of Platform Partners. 

10

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYIntroduction

This document presents Norfolk’s 
Resilience Strategy, which codifies our 
commitment to how we face and respond 
to our current and future challenges.
Our resilience strategy centers on the 
ability of individuals, systems, and our 
neighborhoods to survive, adapt, and, 
when conditions require it, transform 
in the face of shocks and stresses.  At 
its core, our resilience strategy is a 
commitment by each citizen, organization, 
and municipal system, and by leadership 
from all sectors, to acknowledge our 
stresses and vulnerabilities and to work 
proactively to find solutions. Our collective 
goal is not only to reduce risks, but also 
to innovate and transform our city in a 
systemic and holistic way, embracing new 
ways of thinking and managing and thriving 
amid conditions that require continuous 
innovation. 
It is our hope that this document serves as 
more than a record of Norfolk’s resilience 
strategy, but rather as a call to action.  
To this end, throughout this document, 
we showcase the real power behind 
Norfolk’s resilience: the doers and makers 
who call Norfolk home. We hold up these 
individuals — our Resilient City Builders 
— as our inspirational examples of what 
Norfolk is all about. 
Over the next year, we will periodically 
identify and profile a growing number of 
Resilient City Builders, each time reminding 
us of our 400-year history of resilience 
and that Norfolk’s future is what we make 
it. We encourage you to nominate anyone 
you believe is one of Norfolk’s Resilient 
City Builders (the nomination form is on 
our website, www.NFKresilientcity.org). 
Most importantly, we encourage you to 
join us in creating the new Norfolk, an 
international model of resilience for the 
next 400 years. 

RESILIENT CITY BUILDERS

Mason Andrews, a resident of 
Norfolk’s Ghent neighborhood and 
an associate professor of architecture 
at Hampton University, is building 
the city’s resilience to flooding. 
Mason is working collaboratively 
with Chesterfield Heights Civic 
League President Cheryll Sumner, 
Executive Director of  Wetlands 
Watch Skip Stiles, and ODU 
Associate Professor of Civil and 
Environmental Engineering Mujde 
Erten-Unal to develop innovative 
water management practices to 
curtail flooding in the historic coastal 
neighborhood of Chesterfield 
Heights. Hampton University and 
ODU students designed ways 
for residents to work together to 
hold rain runoff in yards, planters, 
rain barrels, and streets, creating a 
system that, when implemented, 
will substantially reduce street 
flooding. This project was made 
possible by a close collaboration of 
engineers and architects across the 
region, and  by generous funding 
from the Virginia Sea Grant.

11

Norfolk: Past, Present, and Future

Norfolk is a historic city on the water. For 400 years, the city has been a key part of America’s 
history, commerce, and innovation. We are known for resilience — surviving wars, a plague, 
hurricanes, and social upheaval.  Time and again, we have reinvented and rebuilt ourselves.  This 
legacy has resulted in a citizenry accustomed to change and resilient to stresses and shocks. 
We recognize the challenges before us and are addressing them head-on with a conviction and 
passion that are unique to the people who make Norfolk home today. 

 City of Norfolk, 1892

Norfolk Yesterday

Norfolk was established in August 1682 
after a British act in 1680 ordered the 
establishment of a fifty-acre port town 
in each Virginia county. The “Towne of 
Lower Norfolk County” was bounded 
on the east, west, and south by the 
Elizabeth River and on the north by 
what is now City Hall Avenue. In 1736, 
Norfolk was granted “borough” status. 
It grew steadily and had a population of 
6,000 by 1775, the eve of the American 
Revolution. 
Over the course of the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries, Norfolk’s history 
was punctuated by challenging historical 

events. However, these events alone 
did not shape Norfolk; rather, the way 
in which the city bounced back from 
these events created the Norfolk we 
know today. 
On January 1, 1776, British forces 
bombarded Norfolk from ships 
anchored offshore. Patriot factions 
completed the destruction so the 
British could not house their army in 
the city. Only the walls of the Borough 
Church (today’s St. Paul’s Episcopal) 
remained standing. Citizens returned, 
however, and began to rebuild. By 1800, 
Norfolk’s population numbered 7,000 

12

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYNorfolk Yesterday

Norfolk’s original fifty acres imposed over the current city
— the eighth largest town in America.  
The 1807 attack on the USS frigate 
Chesapeake by the HMS Leopard 
offshore was a contributing factor in 
President Thomas Jefferson’s decision to 
ask Congress to declare war on Great 
Britain—the War of 1812. The ensuing 
British Navigation Acts and Jefferson’s 
Embargo Act closed the port and all 
but crippled the local economy. But 
Norfolk rebounded; a gradual return 
to prosperity followed in subsequent 
decades, eventually leading to Norfolk’s 
incorporation as a city in 1845. 
In 1855, one-third of Norfolk’s 
population died during a yellow 
fever epidemic. Just seven years later, 
early in the American Civil War, one 
of the most famous naval battles in 
history played out within view of the 
city between the first two ironclad 
battleships, the USS Monitor and CSS 
Virginia (formerly the USS Merrimac). 

Two months later in May 1862, Norfolk 
was surrendered to Union forces and 
was under federal occupation for the 
remainder of the Civil War. 
Despite these grave challenges, 
Norfolk was able to bounce back. 
By the turn of the century, Norfolk’s 
borders were expanding and the city 
was experiencing significant economic 
growth. In 1917, the grounds of the 
1907 Jamestown Exposition became 
home to the U.S. Naval Operating 
Base, setting the stage for the city’s 
current economic engine, Naval Station 
Norfolk. Two world wars more than 
doubled the city’s population. This 
population growth, combined with infill 
development to support the industrial 
waterfront and a series of annexations 
that ended in 1959, defined Norfolk’s 
current borders: 61.86 square miles 
with 144 miles of waterfront that 
surround and shape the city’s identity.

RESILIENCE
Urban resilience 
is the capacity 
of individuals, 
communities, 
institutions, 
businesses, and 
systems within 
a city to survive, 
adapt, and grow no 
matter what kinds 
of chronic stresses 
and acute shocks 
they experience.

13

 Norfolk’s regional railway and naval transportation connectivity

Credit: Waggoner & Ball Architects

Norfolk Today

Today, Norfolk is an international city and 
the hub of the Hampton Roads region. 
Norfolk is the home to Naval Station 
Norfolk, the largest naval complex in the 
world, which supports the readiness of 
the Navy’s U.S. Atlantic fleet and drives 
the economy of Norfolk and the region. 
Norfolk is also home to the Port of 
Virginia’s Norfolk International Terminals, 
one of the city’s and the region’s most 
significant economic assets, which makes 
Norfolk an integral node in national and 
global trade. 

These two stalwart industries provide 
the foundation for the region’s economy. 
Department of Defense spending 
supports 40 percent of total regional 
employment. Over 8,000 service members 
transition out of the military annually in the 
Hampton Roads region, providing the city 
with a highly skilled labor force. In addition, 
the Port of Virginia handles over 81 million 
tons of cargo, generates $60 billion of 
economic activity annually, and provides 
employment in port-related industries for 
343,000 Virginians.

Norfolk Jobs by Industry Sector, 2014

80,670

21,750

Government
Health Care & Social Assistance
Retail Trade
Accommodation & Food Services
Professional & Technical Services
Transportation & Warehousing
Administrative & Waste Management
Manufacturing
Finance & Insurance
Construction
Education Services
Wholesale Trade
Source: EMSI (Note: Industries with fewer than 3,000 jobs and other services not depicted; rounded)

12,080
11,010
8,780
8,580
7,710
6,190
5,920
4,770
4,250
3,470

14

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYNorfolk Today

Overreliance on these sectors, though, 
poses risks to today’s economy. Military 
jobs in Norfolk decreased approximately 
25 percent between 2001 and 2014, 
sending ripple effects through the city’s 
economy and driving the city toward an 
overall job loss of 11 percent during that 
time period. While the Port of Virginia 
is projected to grow, the city has not 
maximized its position near the port to 
cultivate an export economy in the city.
Slow growth in other sectors has made 
it difficult for the city to rebound from 
significant military job loss and the 
recent recession. According to the  
Brookings Institution, economic 
recovery in the Virginia Beach-Norfolk-
Newport News metropolitan statistical 
area ranked 281 of 300 metropolitan 
areas nationwide. Further, sectors in the 
city that are seeing job growth tend to 
have lower wages than sectors that are 
declining. 

In addition, the city faces unique fiscal, 
capital, and land availability challenges. 
Over 5,000 of the city’s 73,000+ 
parcels are non-taxable due to the large 
presence of government and nonprofit 
institutions, which limits the city’s ability 
to raise needed revenue. Further, over 
90 percent of the city is built, making 
it difficult to expand existing or locate 
new large businesses. Finally, while 
the city’s entrepreneurship sector is 
growing, venture capital investment, a 
key component of an entrepreneurial 
system, remains low. In 2014, the region 
was ranked 88th out of 89 regions in the 
total value of venture capital invested.

Norfolk Job Loss/Growth by  
Industry Sector, 2001- 2014

Health Care &  
Social Assistance
Professional &  
Technical Services
Education Services
Accommodation &  
Food Services
Administrative & 
Waste Management
-11%

(1,550)

-23%

-29%

-20%

-41%

-37%
-14%

(1,980)
(2,200)
(2,400)
(3,710)
(4,250)
(13,280)

4,440
1,590
870
530
40

+26%

+22%

+26%

+5%

+0%

Retail Trade
Finance &  
Insurance
Construction
Transportation 
& Warehousing
Wholesale Trade
Manufacturing
Government

Source: EMSI (Note: industries with fewer than 3,000 
jobs in 2014 and other services not depicted; rounded)

Average City Wages for  

Growing & Declining Industries, 2014

$56,086

$50,926

$40,770

Citywide 
Average

Growing 
Industries

Declining 
Industries

Industries in which Norfolk is gaining jobs have lower 
wages than industries in which Norfolk is losing jobs.
Source: EMSI

15

At the same time, the city presents several key characteristics that position it well 
for economic growth and diversification, including:
•  Strength in other sectors: While 

the port and military are large 
anchor institutions and will continue 
to provide a foundation for the 
city’s economy, Norfolk is a leader in 
health care, education, finance, and 
information technology within the 
region. 

•  Role as the region’s urban job 

center: With 191,212 jobs, Norfolk 
is the region’s job center. And with 
3,533 jobs per square mile, Norfolk 
also has the highest job density in 
the region. The city provides urban 
assets by serving as the region’s 
downtown commercial core and by 
supplying its only rail transit system, 
the Tide, to support residents and 
employees.

•  Concentration of high-wage 
jobs: Norfolk’s status as a hub 
for industries, like professional 
services and finance, is reflected 
in an average wage of $50,926—
higher than the Hampton Roads 
region and slightly higher than the 
Commonwealth and the nation. 

•  Presence of educational 
institutions: Norfolk has a 
foundation of higher education 
institutions that can support a 

workforce development pipeline. 
Old Dominion University, Norfolk 
State University, Eastern Virginia 
Medical School, Virginia Wesleyan 
College, and Tidewater Community 
College provide a diverse set of 
programs that can equip Norfolk 
residents with the skills they need 
to engage in growing and emerging 
industries. The institutions are also 
conducting research that has the 
potential to spur new economic 
growth, particularly if the pipeline 
between academia and industry is 
strengthened. 

•  Emergence of an entrepreneurial 

economy: Norfolk is a city that 
works. While indicators like venture 
capital investment remain low, the 
city’s reputation for entrepreneurial 
activity is growing. Local residents 
and entrepreneurs see momentum 
in the entrepreneurial economy, and 
Entrepreneur magazine recently 
named Norfolk one of the top five 
U.S. markets for startups. This spirit 
of hard work is evident throughout 
the city, as residents, businesses, and 
military personnel and their families 
revitalize old spaces, create new 
businesses, and infuse energy into 
emerging industries.

Norfolk Today

16

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYNorfolk Today

Norfolk is not only a city that works, but also 
a city of neighborhoods. Norfolk is made 
up of more than 120 distinct communities 
with vibrant character and high degrees of 
citizen engagement. Our citizens live on the 
beach and along the hundreds of inlets and 
waterways — and more and more, they also 
live downtown on the waterfront and in the 
Arts District. The diversity of neighborhoods 
in this urban core distinguishes Norfolk from 
many other cities along the East Coast. 
Today Norfolk’s population is over 245,000 
in a region of 1.7 million people. Norfolk is 
the second largest city in the Commonwealth 
and serves as the region’s urban center with 
the highest population density in the region 
(4,548 people per square mile). Norfolk’s 
population diversity sets the city apart 
from the region, the Commonwealth, and 
the nation. This diversity is recognized and 
celebrated by its citizens. When asked in 
local surveys what distinguishes Norfolk from 
other U.S. cities, respondents often identify 
Norfolk’s diversity as one of the city’s greatest 
advantages. 
While diversity is one of our city’s most 
distinguishing attributes, it is also one of our 
greatest challenges. Poverty levels are highly 
concentrated in some communities, and  
the difference is even more significant by race 
and age. 
Relative to other cities in Hampton Roads, 
Norfolk has the highest level of income 
inequality. More than half of our residents 
have low to moderate incomes, with 19.2 
percent living in poverty, and the city’s median 
household income of $44,747 is lower than 
that of the region, state, and country. Nearly 
one-third of Norfolk’s residents are highly 
rent-burdened, spending over 50 percent of 
their income on housing. The current social 
and economic stresses facing many residents 
pose critical challenges for the city.  

Share of Population by Race, 2013
6%
9%
4%
5%
13%

6%
6%
19%

5%
4%

31%

42%

61%

49%

69%

74%

Norfolk

MSA
White Alone
Black Alone

Source: US Census Bureau

State

Nation

Asian Alone
Other

Median Household Income by 

Census Block Group, 2013

Source: ESRI

Share of Population Living in Poverty  

by Race, 2013

30%

14%

23%

21%

8%

9%

28%

13%

Norfolk

MSA
Black

State
White

Nation

Source: US Census Bureau

17

Norfolk Today

It is imperative that every member of our 
diverse city have an acceptable standard of 
living and easy access to all the community’s 
services and related advantages. 
Norfolk’s greatest advantage is its access to 
water. Water has always been one of our 
most critical assets, as it drives our economy 
and enhances our quality of life. Few urban 
environments offer access to 144 miles 
of shoreline; water is our identity, and it 
differentiates us. 
Norfolk floods. The city has flooded throughout 
its history, but the severity and frequency 
of this flooding have increased significantly 
over the last decade. Several new trends are 
exacerbating these risks and forcing us to 
evolve the way we live with water, including:
•  Sea level rise and subsidence: Rising seas 
and localized land subsidence have led to 
Norfolk having the highest rate of relative 
sea level rise on the East Coast. While 
global sea levels have risen 5–8 inches over 
the last century, in Norfolk, the sea level has 
risen over 14 inches since 1930. 

•  More frequent storms: Six out of the 

eleven highest water levels that affected 
Norfolk since 1933 occurred in the last 
twelve years. Flooding risks will continue 
to increase. Nuisance tidal flooding in the 
city has increased by 325 percent since 
1960 and the local sea level is projected to 
rise between 1.5 and 7.5 feet by the year 
2100. With 25 percent of Norfolk’s parcels 
already located in the 100-year floodplain, 
it’s clear the city will need to plan differently 
for the future.
Increasing flood risk: While all residents 
of Norfolk are increasingly threatened by 
more frequent and more intense storms, as 
well as routine nuisance flooding, some of 
Norfolk’s most socially and economically at-
risk neighborhoods are disproportionately 
vulnerable to flooding and storms. 

• 

18

RESILIENT CITY BUILDERS

Karen Scherberger, CEO of 
Norfolk’s Festevents, and Mary 
Miller, President and CEO 
of the Downtown Norfolk 
Council, joined forces to help 
the community capture the 
essence of Norfolk. Through 
their work establishing Norfolk’s 
Collaboratory, Karen and Mary 
asked citizens to weigh in on 
what’s important and unique 
about our city. Through this 
innovative crowdsourcing effort, 
residents identified specific 
attributes — our waterfront, our 
diverse population, our historic 
importance, our military, and 
our unique urban vibe — as 
characteristics that make Norfolk 
a great place to live. Now 
members of the Collaboratory 
are working together to 
highlight these important 
characteristics, telling the world 
what makes Norfolk great.

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYNorfolk Today

10.0

)
t
e
e
F
 

W,

L
L
M

(
 
 

I

N
O
T
A
V
E
L
E

8.0

6.0

4.0

2.0

0.0

Water Level Elevations of Significant Storms since 1933 at Sewells Point Tide Gauge

9.2 FEET (2009 100-Year Flood Plain)

8.1

6.7

7.2

6.4

6.5

7.9

6.7

7.7

7.5

6.8

6.5

1933

Hurricane

1936

Hurricane

1962
Ash 

Wednesday

1978

Nor’easter

1998

Nor’easter

Hurricane 

2003 
Isabel

2006 

Nor’easter

2009

Nor’easter

Hurricane 

2011
Irene

Hurricane 

2012 
Sandy

2015 
Hurricane 
Joaquin

Source: NOAA; Sewells Point Tide Gauge, Norfolk

Norfolk’s Future

As our coastal risks continue to shift, 
we face challenges in how to respond 
and plan for today and the future. With 
over 90 percent of our land built out 
with homes and businesses, there is 
little room to physically shift ourselves 
in traditional ways. Nor do we wish to 
retreat from the water; instead, we will 
find new ways to live with it.
While changing natural, economic, and 
social environments are challenging, they 
are not impossible to address. In fact, 
these stresses present an opportunity 
for us to leverage our strengths and 
assets to build a stronger, more resilient 
Norfolk for the next 400 years.
Norfolk’s livelihood and economy will 
remain on the water. Because of this, 
Norfolk must adapt to the changing 
environment in new ways. Living and 
working differently on the water allow 
us to think about new ways to harness 
the water — developing innovative 
industries and technologies, designing 

new physical and open spaces, and 
engaging differently with each other 
to mitigate risks and strengthen 
communities. 
The changing role of the military and 
other economic shifts require us to 
identify new opportunities to grow 
our economic pie. With our strengths 
and emerging industries, we have an 
opportunity to pursue strategies that 
create living-wage jobs for all residents 
by building, retaining, and attracting 
a diverse set of vibrant businesses 
and by equipping Norfolk’s residents 
with the skills they will need for jobs 
in growing industries. Industries such 
as the maritime and medical clusters 
and entrepreneurial businesses can be 
catalysts for this inclusive growth.
Norfolk’s long-term resilience will 
be based, in part, on decreasing high 
levels and concentrations of poverty. 
Neighborhoods that have been 
physically, economically, or socially 

19

RESILIENT CITY BUILDERS

Norfolk’s Future

Projected Sea Level Rise at  
Sewells Point, VA, 1992 - 2100

)
s
r
e
t
e
m

(
 
e
g
n
a
h
C

 
l
e
v
e
l
 
a
e
S
 
e
v
i
t
a
e
R

l

USACE High Rate
USACE Intermediate Rate
USACE Low Rate  
(Current Rate)

2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
2070
1992
 Source: US Army Corps of Engineers

2050

2015

2030

2090

2100

disconnected must be better connected to 
quality jobs, schools, transportation, healthy 
food, parks and recreation, and other factors 
that improve quality of life and build strong, 
resilient communities. Expanding access 
to employment and services, creating 
neighborhoods of choice, and tackling 
poverty head-on require dedicated attention, 
more innovative and holistic solutions, and 
additional resources. 
Building the city of the future requires 
leveraging our opportunities and seeking 
adaptive, innovative strategies to embrace 
and overcome our challenges. Residents, 
community groups, the private sector, and 
city leaders must engage with each other 
to develop solutions that allow businesses 
to flourish and residents to safely live, work, 
and play in this globally important city. This 
strategy also stands as an invitation to all 
residents to engage in dialogue and action 
to ensure that all of Norfolk’s residents, 
neighborhoods, and businesses can continue 
to thrive at sea level.

Marty Kaszubowski has been 
working to build a support 
system for entrepreneurs 
for over a decade. His latest 
venture is Old Dominion 
University’s Norfolk Innovation 
Center,  opening on Boush 
Street in downtown Norfolk. 
The center connects new 
businesses to mentors, capital, 
learning, legal advice, marketing, 
and financial information. The 
goal is to help new businesses 
grow the region’s economy. 
Marty believes connecting 
people to people, people 
to resources, and people 
to new ideas is the secret 
sauce for entrepreneurs.

20

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITY21

NORFOLK’S RESILIENCE STRATEGY: 
Guiding Tenets

The development of Norfolk’s Resilience Strategy is based on eight core guiding 
tenets or values. We believe our resilience strategy must be:
•  Celebrating and building on existing 

•  Community-driven and connected: 

work: We recognize, honor, and build on 
the important leaders and work already 
underway. The creation of our resilience 
strategy recognizes and seeks to elevate 
prior and current resilience building 
initiatives, projects, and actions by the city, 
nonprofit organizations, and communities.
•  Aspirational: We take an approach that 
inspires other people and organizations 
across our community to engage and 
participate in the successful and continuous 
transformation of Norfolk into the most 
dynamic and authentic urban waterfront 
community in America. 

•  Proactive, not reactive: We acknowledge 
and embrace change, risks, and challenges 
by being proactive. We commit to 
transforming by viewing challenges as 
opportunities to reinvent ourselves.

•  Fair and equitable: We define the future 
by developing visions built on our current 
assets, equitably distributed throughout the 
city. Our work is neighborhood-focused 
to ensure that all citizens live in resilient 
communities.

22

We create a strategy with, not for the 
community. We connect and align people, 
places, and systems to create benefits 
across multiple systems. By intentionally 
connecting these systems through a 
community-driven process, we believe we 
can have transformative impact and be an 
innovative leader in resilience. 

• 

•  Actionable and practical: We create 
change at the city, neighborhood, and 
resident scales. Some resilience initiatives 
deliver rapid change while others may 
take a generation or more to realize. 
Collectively we generate strategies and 
solutions that can have significant impact 
on the city in the near and long term.
Informed: We are informed by a growing 
body of data-driven and research-based 
plans and reports undertaken by the city 
and its partners. We will increase access 
to information for everyone to engage in 
informed decision-making for the future. 
•  Long-lasting: We focus on the continuous 
transformation of Norfolk. While Norfolk 
has constantly evolved over the past 

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYNORFOLK’S RESILIENCE STRATEGY: Guiding Tenets

400 years, the challenges 
ahead call for more residents 
and organizations to join the 
resilience cause in a more 
deliberate manner.

In the pages that follow, you will 
learn about our initial resilience 
strategy development process, 
vision, and implementation 
approach, all of which are guided by 
these fundamental tenets of belief.
The resilience strategy process 
was also guided by the 100RC 
City Resilience Framework (CRF). 
The CRF, developed by Arup with 
support from The Rockefeller 
Foundation, is based on extensive 

research in and about city systems 
and is built on four essential 
dimensions of urban resilience: 
Health and Wellbeing, Economy 
and Society, Infrastructure and 
Environment, and Leadership 
and Strategy. Taken together, the 
CRF provides a new method 
for evaluating a city’s strengths 
and weaknesses and a lens to 
understand the complexity of cities 
and the drivers that contribute 
to their resilience. The resilience 
team used this framework to 
assess Norfolk’s challenges and 
opportunities and guide the 
strategies and actions included in 
this plan.

100RC City Resilience Framework

Each of the four CRF dimensions 
contains contains three “drivers,” which 
reflect the actions cities can take to 
improve their resilience. The CRF also 
considers which key qualities resilient 
systems require to withstand, respond 
to, and adapt more readily to shocks 
and stresses. Extensive research has 
shown that resilient cities demonstrate 
seven qualities. Reflectiveness and 
resourcefulness reflect the ability to 
learn from the past and act in times 
of crisis. Robustness, redundancy, and 
flexibility are qualities that help to 
conceive systems and assets that can 
withstand shocks and stresses as well as 
build the willingness to use alternative 
strategies to facilitate rapid recovery. 
Inclusivity and integration reflect 
the processes of good governance 
and effective leadership that ensure 
investments and actions are appropriate, 
address the needs of the most 
vulnerable, and collectively create a 
resilient city—for everyone. 

23

NORFOLK’S RESILIENCE STRATEGY: 
Planning Process

100 Resilient Cities Kickoff Workshop, February 2014

We began our journey by asking a 
simple question: What most challenges 
our city’s ability to thrive today and to 
bounce back from a disaster tomorrow? 
Through a six-month conversation 
with hundreds of community members 
— representing residents, nonprofits, 
educational institutions, the military, 
the business sector, the faith based 
community, and local government —  
a clear picture emerged. While 
increasing frequency and intensity of 
coastal storms and resultant flooding 
was top-of-mind for almost every 
resident, issues impacting the city’s 
economic future, including those arising 
from concentrations of poverty, quickly 
dominated the discussion. 
To provide leadership and insight during 
this process, a steering committee 
and working groups — composed of 
resident, business, nonprofit, and city 
staff stakeholders — met to review 
previous work, digest new information, 

and discuss ways to build resilience. 
All team members brought individual 
expertise to bear on the process, but 
the cross-committee dialogue was  
most critical in forming connections 
across the city’s strengths and identifying 
creative resilience opportunities. For 
example, the steering committee 
and working groups recognized that 
solutions to flooding can positively 
drive economic activity; that innovative 
water management practices can be 
used to reconnect neighborhoods 
and drive economic vitality; and that 
networks designed to ensure citizen 
safety during disruptive events can build 
neighborhood cohesion when the skies 
are blue. In short, they viewed the city’s 
challenges as opportunities to change in 
resilient ways. 
This collaborative diagnostic work was 
informed by the array of initiatives and 
research already underway across the 
city and by independent analysis and 

24

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYNORFOLK’S RESILIENCE STRATEGY: Planning Process

activities designed specifically for this process.  
The exciting new efforts included:
•  Conducting a baseline economic analysis 
that assessed current trends and identified 
challenges and opportunities for the city’s 
future economic growth, including interviews 
with more than thirty organizations and an 
entrepreneurial and small business survey 
completed by over 130 local businesspeople.
•  Convening other cities in the 100RC network 

with land use experts from around the 
country to explore the next generation of 
resilient land use planning and to provide close 
consultation on Norfolk’s specific land use 
challenges and opportunities.

•  Partnering with Sandia National Laboratories, 

a 100RC platform partner, to assess the 
potential economic impact of a storm 
on Norfolk’s key assets and the resultant 
economic impact on the nation.

•  Collaborating with local leaders to better 

understand social and economic issues 
across Norfolk’s diverse neighborhoods and 
experiment with new technologies to find 
ways to help connect people in need.
•  Conducting comparative analysis and 

receiving technical support from other chief 
resilience officers and subject-matter experts 
around how global cities have used water 
infrastructure to help connect and protect 
communities.

•  Developing a state-of-the-art Resilience 

Data Dashboard with the support of Palantir, 
another 100RC platform partner, to integrate 
key city data to improve the city’s ability to 
understand risks, be more responsive to 
citizens, and make better decisions about the 
future. 

This integrated approach led the city to identify 
three key resilience goals, each with supporting 
strategies and actions, which will help to bolster 
the city’s physical, economic, and social resilience 
moving forward. 

RESILIENT CITY BUILDERS

John Stewart, leader of the 
grassroots Lafayette Wetlands 
Partnership, has been working 
with communities to build 
resilience one green space at a 
time. Since 2007, John and his 
team of exceptional volunteers 
have worked with residents to 
restore wetlands throughout the 
Lafayette River system. To date, 
the partnership has restored 
over 15,000 square feet of 
wetlands, creating a “string of 
pearls” along the river that 
provides wildlife habitat, helps 
clean the water, and creates 
inviting places for people to 
visit along the Lafayette River.

25

NORFOLK’S RESILIENCE STRATEGY: 
Framework

26

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYNORFOLK’S RESILIENCE STRATEGY: Framework

Norfolk’s resilience approach is driven by three key goals, each bolstered by supporting strategies and actions. 
Some actions represent new initiatives; others are already underway.  All are a commitment to a new way of 
doing business — infused with our key tenets, they’re collective and coordinated actions to build resilience.  
The strategies and actions featured in this document are exhaustive of neither the efforts that have taken 
place, nor those initiatives the city will pursue.  This strategy seeks to set a marker at this point in time 
to acknowledge the extensive work that has been done and establish a framework and philosophy for 
how Norfolk will collectively pursue our resilience-building efforts going forward. The strategic resilience 
framework is organized as follows:

 GOAL 1  

Design the coastal community of the future.

STRATEGIES
1.  Collectively create a vision for the city’s future.
2.  Access, identify, and implement innovative infrastructure for water management.
3.  Create a place where people want to live, work, and play.
4.  Redesign tools and regulations to achieve our vision for the future.

 GOAL 2  

Create economic opportunity by advancing efforts to 
grow existing and new sectors.

STRATEGIES
1.  Create a multi-pronged economic development strategy.
2.  Nurture the city’s entrepreneurial ecosystem.
3.  Strengthen the workforce development pipeline.
4.  Reinvest in and revitalize neighborhoods.
5.  Explore innovative financing methods.

 GOAL 3  

Advance initiatives to connect communities,
deconcentrate poverty, and strengthen neighborhoods.

Improve citizen access to information and services.

STRATEGIES
1. 
2.  Support community-building efforts through technology.
3.  Connect the community through conversation.

27

GOAL 1: Design the Coastal 
Community of the Future

Norfolk’s position as a coastal city is 
closely connected to its history, culture, 
and economy. In the face of rising sea 
levels, we are committed to continuing 
the globally important work of ensuring 
trade moves seamlessly through our 
port, to supporting the readiness of the 
nation’s naval forces, and to safeguarding 
our city’s historic, cultural, and 
natural assets. To achieve this goal we 
acknowledge that the city must physically 
change. We embrace the idea that 
this physical transformation can drive 
economic vitality and social cohesion. 
Recognizing our risk, we have worked 
over the past decades to evaluate 
and design infrastructure to protect 
Norfolk’s edge. We have built seawalls, 
sophisticated dune systems, and other 
types of gray and green infrastructure 
to keep us safe and dry. But with sea-
level rise and increased storm intensity, 

we need to expand our thinking and 
our solutions and develop creative new 
infrastructure systems at both the edge 
and within the city. We need to think 
differently about how we build, how 
we connect, and how we live with and 
embrace the water. 
As we design and build a new kind of 
coastal community to withstand changing 
threats, we are committed to reducing 
residents’ exposure to risk, to building 
an economy driven by innovative 
solutions, to leveraging infrastructure 
investments to create new open spaces 
for citizens, and to bringing communities 
together and attracting new residents 
to our city. Our efforts to design the 
coastal community of the future can 
demonstrate how coastal cities around 
the world can learn to live, adapt, and 
thrive along the water.

28

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYGOAL 1: Design the Coastal Community of the Future

STRATEGY 1: Collectively create a vision for the city’s future.

To create the coastal community of the future, we will define our future through a collaborative 
visioning process. Building on PlaNorfolk 2030, the city’s comprehensive planning effort, we are 
developing our vision for a resilient future through design-based dialogues.

ACTIONS

Launch Vision 2100, a citizen-led long-term 
planning initiative. 
The City of Norfolk’s Planning and Neighborhood 
Development departments are collaborating to 
create Vision 2100, a citizen-led discussion to 
identify what’s important and what principles the 
city should use to guide future land use decisions. 
Vision 2100 is informed by the resilience thinking 
in this strategy; it will bring that thinking into 
communities, collectively map community assets, 
and facilitate discussions about where and how 
the city should make long-term investments for 
future growth. 
Timeline:  November 2015 through March 2016.

Partner with global experts to develop next-
generation water management strategies.
 The Royal Netherlands Embassy, Hampton Roads 
Planning District Commission, and the cities of 
Norfolk, Newport News, and Hampton jointly 
hosted the Virginia Dutch Dialogues in June 2015 
to generate innovative ideas for living with water. 
For Norfolk, these innovations included using 
water management as a way to protect and 
revitalize neighborhoods. 
Timeline:  Drawing from ideas explored during 
the 2015 Virginia Dutch Dialogues, the City of 
Norfolk played a leadership role in developing a 
recent proposal submitted by the Commonwealth 
of  Virginia to the Department of Housing and 
Urban Development for funds to build resilience 
to community threats, including flooding, 
economic downturns, and concentrated poverty. 
Grant awards are scheduled for January 2016. 

Resilience partners include:
American Institute of Architects
ARCADIS
City of Hampton
City of Newport News
City of Norfolk
Commonwealth of  Virginia
Elizabeth River Project
Emerging Leaders Program
Hampton Roads ULI
Hampton University
HR&A Advisors
Old Dominion University
Royal Netherlands Embassy
Slover Library Foundation
Waggonner & Ball Architects
Wetlands Watch
Work Program Architects

29

GOAL 1: Design the Coastal Community of the Future

STRATEGY 2:  Assess, identify, and implement innovative 

infrastructure for water management.

Designing the coastal community of the future requires water management approaches and 
infrastructure that respond to both current and future risk. Norfolk will pioneer both hard 
and soft infrastructure solutions and the creative funding models needed to implement these 
solutions.

Innovate to combine hard and 
natural systems to better control 
flooding. 
RE.invest, a Rockefeller Foundation 
partnership with re:focus partners, 
Bechtel, Wall Street Without Walls, 
and Akin Gump Strauss Hauer Feld 
LLP, provided new ideas for designing 
and financing hard and natural systems 
to control flooding. The group focused 
on integrated flood management 
solutions in the Arts District and 
explored solutions, such as cost-
effective green infrastructure options 
and seawall upgrades, to address the 
frequent flooding challenges that limit 
economic development opportunities. 
The team also identified relevant legal 
and financial mechanisms to support 
public and private investments in the 
innovative solutions. Led by the city’s 
departments of Public Works and 
Finance, this partnership is working to 
move these ideas to new practices.
Timeline:  The report was completed 
in 2014. The City of Norfolk is 
developing plans to implement the 
most promising innovations.

Establish a global practice on 
water innovation.
In October 2015, the 100RC cities 
of Norfolk, New Orleans, Bangkok, 
Berkeley, Surat, Mexico City, Vejle, 
Rome, and Rotterdam convened in 
Rotterdam with global experts to 
provide peer critiques and explore 
how to achieve multi-benefits from 
flood mitigation efforts. Norfolk 
presented its innovative model of 
using water management to revitalize 
a low-income neighborhood, and the 
City of Rotterdam was used as a living 
lab to explore Dutch innovations, 
such as water plazas and underground 
storage facilities. Leveraging the 
power of the 100RC network and 
global partners, Norfolk will lead the 
creation of the next generation of 
innovative practices for managing and 
living with water. 
Timeline: Further network 
collaboration kicks off in November 
2015 and will continue into 2016. We 
will synthesize these initial insights 
into recommendations for our local 
businesses, chamber of commerce, 
venture companies, and universities, 
and propose methods of capitalizing 
on emerging water management 
technologies by the end of 2016.

ACTIONS

30

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYGOAL 1: Design the Coastal Community of the Future

RESILIENT CITY BUILDERS

Explore design ideas for the future. 
In partnership with the University of 
Pennsylvania School of Design and The 
Rockefeller Foundation, Norfolk participated 
in a new initiative called the Structures of 
Coastal Resilience. The partnership produced 
new data and design concepts for the future, 
including building “fingers of high ground” in 
the Lafayette River watershed to create areas 
that can be developed even with expectant 
sea level rise. The new data and thinking 
are being integrated into Vision 2100 and 
other initiatives led by the city’s Planning 
Department.
Timeline: Initial findings were published in 
2015. In December 2015, the U.S. Army Corps 
of Engineers and the City of Norfolk will 
host a charrette to further workshop design 
concepts and identify next steps.
Partner with the U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers on a comprehensive flood risk 
study. 
Working together, the City of Norfolk and the 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers will conduct a 
comprehensive study of flooding in Norfolk.  
The study will evaluate options to reduce the 
city’s flooding risk.
Timeline: This will start in early 2016 and be 
completed in fall 2019. The city will integrate 
this study’s outcomes with other ongoing 
actions to advance strategies for better 
leveraging flood mitigation investments.

Resilience partners include:
100 Resilient Cities network
Akin Gump Strauss Hauer Feld LLP 
Bechtel  
City of Norfolk
re:focus Partners

Rockefeller Foundation
UPenn School of Design
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers  
Wall Street Without Walls

Tom McNeilan, a civil and 
geotechnical engineer, loves 
Norfolk!  Tom, a resident of 
Freemason, was instrumental 
in connecting the city with 
Dale Morris from the Royal 
Netherlands Embassy and David 
Waggonner, a New Orleans-
based architect, and in bringing 
the Virginia Dutch Dialogues’ 
“Life at Sea Level” workshop to 
Norfolk. Through Tom’s efforts, 
more than thirty experts from 
around the world came to 
Norfolk in June to help our 
citizens imagine what Norfolk 
will look like as we embrace the 
water. The resulting ideas are 
shaping solutions to flooding in 
the city and building resilience by 
helping us learn to live with water.

31

GOAL 1: Design the Coastal Community of the Future

STRATEGY 3:  Create a place where people want to live, work, 

and play.

Norfolk’s coastal access is a strong foundation for attracting and retaining residents. In addition 
to protecting the coastline and downtown core through infrastructure investment, Norfolk must 
strengthen its identity as a vibrant, attractive place for residents and businesses alike.

Brand the city. 
The Downtown Norfolk Council 
(DNC), Festevents, and the City 
of Norfolk formed the Norfolk 
Collaboratory in 2013 to crowdsource 
Norfolk’s brand messaging. Through 
the Collaboratory, over 1,600 residents 
identified the city’s diversity, history, and 
waterfront environment as its key assets. 
City agencies and partners are now 
using the Collaboratory’s brand message 
architecture to more seamlessly advance 
Norfolk’s brand. The Collaboratory 
recently received an award of excellence 
from 3CMA for its work in engaging 
and empowering the community to help 
formulate Norfolk’s messaging.
Timeline: Ongoing implementation. 
The DNC, Festevents, and other 
organizations that promote the city are 
using the Collaboratory’s brand message 
architecture to market the city with a 
unified voice. 
Focus on retaining talent. 
The Greater Norfolk Corporation, 
the DNC, and the City of Norfolk 
have launched LiveNorfolk, a summer 
program that gives young people 
interning at corporations and other 
institutions in Norfolk the chance 
to experience the quality of life that 
the city has to offer. LiveNorfolk 
provides city tours, Nauticus sailing, 
networking receptions, and professional 

ACTIONS

32

Virginia Dutch Dialogues:  
Waggonner & Ball Architects Vision  
of Newton’s Creek Watershed
In June 2015, the Royal Netherlands 
Embassy sponsored the second-ever 
Dutch Dialogues in the United States. 
Building on previous planning efforts, 
the dialogues brought together Dutch 
urban designers, engineers, landscape 
architects, planners, academics, and 
government officials to work with 
American counterparts to explore 
creative solutions and holistic concepts 
to reduce flooding. During the 
workshop, experts looked at improving 
infrastructure, nature-based solutions, 
and smart redevelopment. The outcome 
of the dialogues is an innovative water 
management solution that includes 
holding, absorbing, and filtering excess 
water in yards, streets, and new 
retention areas. The strategy developed 
for Norfolk combines rain gardens, 
cisterns, living shorelines, marshes, 
streams, and berms to create a system 
that works together to manage sea level 
rise and precipitation flooding in the city.

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYGOAL 1: Design the Coastal Community of the Future

RESILIENT CITY BUILDERS

development opportunities, among other 
events, to highlight the benefits of living and 
working in the city. Next year the program 
will be extended to more companies and 
organizations. 
Timeline: Ongoing. LiveNorfolk began in 
summer 2014 and will to continue in future 
summers.
Enliven commercial corridors with new 
local businesses. 
Vibrant Spaces, sponsored by the DNC, 
provides discounted retail space to startup 
businesses. The goal is to accelerate the 
creation of neighborhood-defining businesses 
while activating street-level experience in 
the city’s commercial corridors. Vibrant 
Spaces provides grants to energize street-
level businesses’ storefronts, improve signage, 
add outdoor seating, activate sidewalks 
and rooftops, and house a new business 
collaboration. New businesses that are 
selected through a competitive application 
process receive $20,000 and a 50 percent 
break on rent for two years. 
Timeline: Ongoing. Vibrant Spaces launched 
in summer 2015.

Resilience partners include:
City of Norfolk
Downtown Norfolk Council
Festevents
Greater Norfolk Corporation
Grow
Nauticus
Norfolk Convention and Visitors Center
Virginia Arts Festival
Virginia Opera
Virginia Stage Company
Virginia Symphony

Drew Ungvarsky believes in 
Norfolk’s economic potential. 
Owner of Grow, a digital agency 
located on Granby Street, Drew 
is committed to making Norfolk 
a great place for young talent to 
live. Drew is spearheading the 
Vibrant Spaces program for the 
Downtown Norfolk Council 
(DNC). Vibrant Spaces help 
define a city’s unique sense of 
place. Inside and out, they are 
well-designed and alive with 
activity, embracing new ideas to 
create one-of-a-kind experiences, 
products, and services. Put simply, 
they’re the places you can’t 
wait to tell your friends about. 
Drew and the DNC are helping 
to create more Vibrant Spaces 
by connecting start-up retail 
businesses with street-level spaces 
at a deep discount. These new 
spaces will attract talent to and 
retain talent in the city by making 
it a more interesting place to be.

33

GOAL 1: Design the Coastal Community of the Future

STRATEGY 4:  Redesign tools and regulations to achieve our vision 

for the future.

Transforming together means that the city must create the government processes and 
regulatory environment to support resilient actions. These processes must be designed in a way 
that fosters community collaboration and engagement. 

Develop the most resilient zoning 
code in America. 
With assistance from Clarion 
Associates, Renaissance Planning Group, 
Herd Planning & Design, Greehan, 
Taves, Pandak & Stoner, and the 
Miles Agency, the City of Norfolk is 
undertaking a comprehensive rewrite 
of the zoning code. The new code 
aspires to be a user-friendly document 
that incorporates modern best 
practices, supports and encourages 
resilient development, promotes 
environmentally friendly development, 
and recognizes the different characters 
of districts throughout the city. The city’s 
Planning Department has been central 
in the development of this resilience 
strategy and has set the ambitious 
goal of using this zoning code rewrite 
to create the new gold standard for 
integrating resilience principles into land 
use planning. The rewrite will serve as a 
model for coastal zoning nationwide. 
Timeline: The zoning code rewrite 
process began in November 2014, and 
completion is targeted for 2017. 
Partner with academia and diverse 
cities on the future of land use. 
With leadership from Norfolk and 
support from 100RC, the cities of 
Boulder, New York, New Orleans, and 
Norfolk participated in a workshop 
with national land use experts to 

discuss how to infuse land use policies 
with resilient practices. As these cities 
embark on substantial updates of 
their land use and citywide plans, the 
workshop enabled the cities to develop 
land use principles and practices 
to enhance resilience. Norfolk is 
incorporating the lessons and technical 
assistance from the workshop into its 
zoning code rewrite process and the 
Vision 2100 plan. 100RC anticipates 
publication of a workshop summary 
report, Leveraging Land Use Regulation 
to Achieve City Resilience Goals. 
Timeline: Ongoing. Outcomes from 
the land use workshop are being 
incorporated into the city’s ongoing 
zoning code rewrite. 100RC anticipates 
releasing the workshop report in fall 
2015.
Use Better Block demonstrations 
to test design ideas. 
Working with citizens, the city held 
three Better Block demonstration 
projects to test design ideas in the 
city’s downtown, Park Place, and Wards 
Corner neighborhoods. Citizens tested 
ideas for creating new businesses, 
expanding public spaces, and calming 
traffic to improve the pedestrian 
experience. The experiments are now 
driving permanent improvements in 
these neighborhoods.
Timeline: This launched in 2013. 

ACTIONS

34

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYGOAL 1: Design the Coastal Community of the Future

Improvements have been and are continuing 
to be implemented. To build on these 
successful efforts, the city will partner with 
100RC partner Street Plans Collaborative 
to identify and plan a new demonstration 
project focused on placemaking, economic 
development, or active transportation that can 
be advanced in the near-term by residents.
Update the Long-Term Recovery Plan. 
The City of Norfolk’s Department of 
Emergency Preparedness and Response, 
in collaboration with the city’s Planning 
Department and Resilience Office, is drafting 
a Long-Term Recovery Plan that will provide 
guidance on how the city will respond to and 
bounce forward from a major disaster. 
Timeline: Ongoing. The city is beginning 
by reviewing models from other cities. The 
Planning and Neighborhood Development 
departments’ Asset Mapping and Vision 2100 
processes in early 2016 will create the general 
principles for developing the plan.
Develop a new rapid housing recovery 
model. 
Supported by a grant from the U.S. 
Department of Housing and Urban 
Development, Old Dominion University 
is working with the cities of Norfolk and 
Portsmouth to create a rapid housing 
recovery model. The goal is to provide cities 
with a tool to identify factors that enhance 
housing production capacity, speed the 
approach back to normalcy, and strengthen 
the housing sector’s resilience in the wake of 
a disaster. 
Timeline: Model development is underway 
and will be available in fall 2016.

Better Block
In 2013, more than 130 citizen 
volunteers teamed with the city in a 
Better Block demonstration project. 
Using planning and infrastructure tools 
to guide development, the team tested 
ideas for a Downtown Arts and Design 
District. Not long after the weekend 
event, properties that had long stood 
vacant began to sell and lease and 
shops, galleries, and restaurants began 
to open. People started coming to 
live, work, and play in the district. This 
once largely neglected area is now 
thriving with business, philanthropic 
investment, and exciting programming, 
and it has benefited from significant 
redevelopment in formerly vacant 
properties.

Resilience partners include:
100 Resilient Cities network
City of Boulder
City of New Orleans
City of New York
City of Norfolk
Clarion Associates
Greehan, Taves, Pandak & Stoner
Herd Planning & Design
Miles Agency
Old Dominion University
Renaissance Planning Group

35

GOAL 2: Create Economic 
Opportunity by Advancing 
Efforts to Grow Existing 
Industries and New Sectors

Norfolk’s economy is dependent on 
two strong assets: Naval Station Norfolk 
and the Port of Virginia. A trend of 
declining spending and job investment 
and an uncertain future geopolitical 
context make it unlikely that traditional 
naval activities alone will drive economic 
growth in the city. While the Port of 
Virginia is projected to grow, the city 
has not maximized its position near the 
port to cultivate an export economy in 
the city. 

To diversify the economy, while also 
creating opportunity for living-wage 
employment for all of our citizens, the 
city will focus economic development 
on expanding existing businesses, 
helping new businesses start, improving 
the workforce to attract and retain 
businesses, and revitalizing our 
neighborhoods to provide great places 
for people to live, work, and play.

36

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYGOAL 2: Create Economic Opportunity by Advancing Efforts to Grow Existing Industries and New Sectors

STRATEGY 1:  Create a multi-pronged economic development 

strategy.

To define and lead a disciplined approach to creating economic opportunity, Norfolk has 
examined its current economic drivers and identified the potential for existing and new sectors 
to drive economic growth. Moving forward, the city will incorporate this knowledge into a plan 
to guide the city’s efforts and investment to increase economic growth, provide greater access to 
higher-paying jobs, and build the city’s resilience to existing economic stresses. 
ACTIONS

Understand and articulate Norfolk’s 
unique economic importance. 
The Port of Virginia and Naval Station 
Norfolk create tremendous economic and 
security benefits, and both of these global 
assets rely directly on the City of Norfolk. To 
better understand those interdependencies, 
and make a case for more investment and 
protection, experts at the Sandia National 
Labs are calculating the cost to the world of 
disruptive flooding in Norfolk. The analysis 
will help reinforce the economic importance 
of Norfolk to the region and nation and 
bolster efforts to strengthen partnerships 
between the city and the port.
Timeline: A report is anticipated for fall 2015.
Craft an economic development plan for 
a resilient future. 
Norfolk’s Department of Development is 
creating a new Comprehensive Economic 
Development Strategy that builds on the 
comprehensive economic baseline study 
conducted for this strategy, and incorporates 
resilience thinking to set goals and identify 
opportunities for the city’s economic future. 
The strategy will incorporate business 
recruitment, expansion, retention, and 
creation using identified growth areas, with 
an emphasis on capturing markets outside 
of the region. Norfolk’s work will feed into a 
regional strategy led by the Hampton Roads 
Planning District Commission. 
Timeline: Upcoming. The planning effort will 
begin in January 2016.

Cultivate new capital for job creation.
Norfolk’s Department of Development 
is working with the U.S. Citizens and 
Immigration Service to establish an EB-5 
Regional Center, which will allow foreign 
direct investment in regional projects 
that create jobs. EB-5 funding will create 
a new source of capital for job-creating 
developments in the city. 
Timeline: Ongoing. The new regional center 
is anticipated to launch in 2016.
Better leverage the export market for 
local economic growth. 
Through a community-driven process, the 
Hampton Roads Community Foundation 
identified increasing the region’s share of the 
export market as an important economic 
development strategy. The foundation is 
funding the new Regional Export Assistance 
Program (REAP) to connect local businesses 
with training, business analytics, and incentives 
to help companies expand into new markets 
outside of the region.
Timeline: This launched in fall 2015.

Resilience partners include: 
City of Norfolk
Hampton Roads Planning District Commission 
ReInvent Hampton Roads

37

GOAL 2: Create Economic Opportunity by Advancing Efforts to Grow Existing Industries and New Sectors

STRATEGY 2:  Nurture the city’s entrepreneurial ecosystem.

Norfolk has emerged over the past few years as a burgeoning center for entrepreneurs. These 
small and growing enterprises infuse energy and excitement into the city. Throughout the 
strategy process, the city engaged these entrepreneurs and identified that, to accelerate growth, 
it is critical that Norfolk address the key challenges of access to capital and access to talent.

Norfolk’s Global 
Initiatives Fund
Starting in 2015, the City 
of Norfolk is funding and 
administering a Global 
Initiatives Fund to support 
local exporters by providing 
patient, flexible capital to fund 
their export-related activities. 
This innovative demonstration 
program recognizes Norfolk’s 
unique port asset and serves 
small and medium-sized 
enterprises seeking to expand 
into global markets. Norfolk’s 
Global Initiatives Fund is the 
first global commerce initiative 
of its kind launched by a local 
government institution in the 
United States.

Launch a new Resilience Lab/
Accelerator.  
The Commonwealth of Virginia and a 
consortium of partners, including Old 
Dominion University and the City of 
Norfolk, are launching a Resilience Lab/
Accelerator to serve as a connector 
between problems, solutions, and market 
for the region’s resilience challenges. The 
goal is to create new businesses through 
the process of building citywide resilience. 
The partners recognize that solving the 
issues of living on the coast, with the 
impacts of sea level rise, will require 
tremendous investment in infrastructure, 
data analysis, and adaptation. The Lab/
Accelerator will work to capture a portion 
of the new resilience market by connecting 
problems with solutions and products. 
Timeline: Fall 2016.
Create and sustain a vibrant business 
community. 
In collaboration with the private, university, 
and nonprofit sectors, the City of Norfolk 
has launched or supported a series of 
programs and projects to encourage the 
creation of new businesses and to help 
existing businesses grow, including: 
•  Export Tech to assist local companies in 

accessing the export market.
•  Community cafés to provide 

ACTIONS

38

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYGOAL 2: Create Economic Opportunity by Advancing Efforts to Grow Existing Industries and New Sectors

RESILIENT CITY BUILDERS

neighborhood-based financial, mentoring, 
legal, and marketing support to small 
businesses, and HATCH, Start Norfolk, 
and Old Dominion University’s Norfolk 
Innovation Center to provide incubator 
space, business training, mentoring, and 
access to finance for promising business 
startups.

•  757 Angels, a new network of investors 

that provides early-stage investment 
capital for emerging companies. Since the 
launch in February 2015, 757 Angels’ 86 
investor members have invested more 
than $1 million in local companies.
Timeline: Some initiatives launched in 
summer 2015.

Resilience partners include: 
757 Angels
Bank of Hampton Roads
City of Norfolk
Fulton Bank
HATCH
Hampton Roads Chamber of Commerce
Hampton Roads Community Foundation
Old Dominion University
Opportunity Inc.
Retail Alliance
SunTrust Bank
Score of Hampton Roads
Virginia Department of Housing and Community Development
U.S. Small Business Administration

James Rogers and Norfolk’s 
Department of Neighborhood 
Development are supporting 
community-led efforts to 
strengthen the city. Through 
the soon-to-be-launched Rent 
Ready program, James and his 
team will connect landlords 
and renters to information that 
improves outcomes for both. 
Landlords who complete the 
Rent Ready Academy, sign up 
for the Emergency Notification 
Database, and pass a quality 
assessment inspection are eligible 
to receive a Rent Ready score. 
They will also be highlighted 
on a Rent Ready properties 
website that assists prospective 
renters with selecting quality 
rentals, and will receive services 
and resources to equip them to 
attract more renters. Through the 
Rent Ready Academy Renters 
Track, renters learn about their 
rights and responsibilities and 
how to be a great resident of 
one of Norfolk’s neighborhoods.

39

GOAL 2: Create Economic Opportunity by Advancing Efforts to Grow Existing Industries and New Sectors

STRATEGY 3:  Strengthen the workforce development pipeline.

A highly qualified workforce is key to the city’s future economic growth. Understanding the 
skills needed to fuel the future economy and ensuring that residents have access to training 
opportunities that build those skills are essential to building the city’s resilience. Building a strong 
workforce starts with youth. We must create pathways for growth and ensure ongoing access 
to education and opportunity through adulthood. Working with partners, the City of Norfolk is 
committed to creating high-quality opportunities for our residents to build the knowledge and 
skills that enable them to support our growth while earning wages that support their families.

Create a career pipeline for low-
income residents. 
Norfolk’s Department of Development 
is developing partnerships with national 
corporations to offer job training 
opportunities that result in living-wage 
employment for low-income residents. 
The department is investigating how 
these projects might be financed using 
social impact bonds and program-related 
investments. The goal is to grow the 
number of living-wage jobs and improve 
the employment pipeline for residents by 
providing targeted and comprehensive 
training financed with partners, lowering 
the cost to the city.
Timeline: Fall 2015.
Open the region’s first career 
pathways school.
 The City of Norfolk, Norfolk 
Public Schools, the Greater Norfolk 
Corporation, and others are working 
together to open the region’s first 
career technical school and workforce 
development center. The goal is to give 
students and transitioning workers 
opportunities to gain technical 
competency in high-employment, in-
demand fields, including shipbuilding and 

ACTIONS

40

Tidewater Community College's Job Skills Training Program
in downtown Norfolk.  Credit: Hampton Roads

Virginia’s maritime industry supports more than 63,000 jobs.
Credit: maritime-executive.com

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYGOAL 2: Create Economic Opportunity by Advancing Efforts to Grow Existing Industries and New Sectors

repair, medical services, and information 
technology. Located in Norfolk, the 
center will be open to students and 
transitioning workers from throughout 
the region, and will have a direct 
impact on strengthening the workforce 
development pipeline. 
Timeline: The opening is anticipated for 
2018.
Provide early interventions as 
part of a robust early childhood 
education system. 
A strong workforce pipeline starts with 
ensuring that all children arrive at school 
ready to learn; that takes a strong early 
care and education system. Sentara 
Healthcare and The Planning Council 
joined forces to create a critical part 
of that system, a Universal Newborn 
Screening and Referral Program. The 
program provides services to families 
identified as at-risk across multiple 
factors that can lead to child abuse or 
neglect. The goal is to connect families 
with services to ultimately reduce the 
number of children who are abused or 
neglected. Started at Sentara’s Norfolk 
General Hospital, the program will 
soon expand to Norfolk’s Sentara Leigh 
Hospital. 
Timeline: Ongoing. Expansion will take 
place in 2016.

Resilience partners include: 
City of Norfolk
Greater Norfolk Corporation
Norfolk Public Schools
Opportunity Inc.
Old Dominion University
Sentara Healthcare
The Planning Council

Universal Screening and Referral Pilot
Early identification is key to delivering 
effective parenting services to reduce 
child abuse and neglect. In July 2014, 
Sentara Norfolk General Hospital, The 
Planning Council, and the city collectively 
launched Care Connection, a screening 
program to identify families with multiple 
risk factors. Nurses use a behavioral 
health risk checklist to screen newborns’ 
families. Those identified with risk factors 
are referred to an intake specialist at 
The Planning Council. The specialist helps 
those families find needed services to 
mitigate the identified risk factors. This 
effort and efforts to improve the quality 
of early education offerings are part of the 
city’s comprehensive effort to strengthen 
the first segments of the workforce 
development pipeline.

41

GOAL 2: Create Economic Opportunity by Advancing Efforts to Grow Existing Industries and New Sectors

STRATEGY 4:  Reinvest and revitalize neighborhoods.

Norfolk’s future economic strength is tied to the vitality of our neighborhoods. Concentrated 
poverty, lack of educational and workforce opportunities, and social isolation restrict economic 
vitality in many of our neighborhoods. To ensure our future resilience, we will focus on actions 
that deconcentrate poverty by mixing incomes and uses, create affordable housing opportunities, 
and build neighborhood-level capacity to drive economic development.
ACTIONS

Increase homeownership and 
deconcentrate poverty. 
The City of Norfolk is working with for-profit 
and nonprofit developers to build single-family 
houses on vacant properties throughout the 
city, with a goal of increasing homeownership 
and deconcentrating poverty. The city’s 
program, called “Lots of Opportunity,” targets 
households in a range from 60 percent to 
120 percent of median income. The program 
is aimed at first-time homebuyers and allows 
the city to develop housing for a variety of 
incomes. 
Timeline:  This launched in fall 2015.
Implement targeted, place-based 
revitalization efforts.
The City of Norfolk, in partnership with 
the Norfolk Housing and Redevelopment 
Authority, is exploring place-based models to 
revitalize areas of highly concentrated poverty. 
Norfolk is exploring options that bring 
together innovations in education, housing, 
and economic development to remake areas 
in the city and provide opportunities for our 
citizens to thrive. The city also is focusing 
on neighborhoods that experience chronic 
flooding, using the need to remake the 
landscape as an opportunity to strengthen 
neighborhood and economic resilience. City 
leadership has visited model sites in other 
cities, including Purpose Built Communities 
sites, and is identifying critical model 
components for implementation.
Timeline: The fact-finding phase launched 
in October 2015.

Grow the capacity of local CDCs to  
build resilient neighborhoods. 
The City of Norfolk is issuing a request 
for proposals for a high-quality provider to 
train and support community development 
corporations (CDCs). The goal is to grow 
the capacity of local CDCs so they can 
play a more dynamic role in neighborhood 
revitalization efforts, which links them to the

Bank on Norfolk 
In January 2016, the city will launch 
Bank On Norfolk, a program that works 
with banks and credit unions to reduce 
barriers to banking and increase access 
to the financial mainstream. This voluntary, 
public-private partnership between local 
government, financial institutions, and 
community-based organizations provides 
low-income un- and under-banked people 
with free or low-cost starter “second 
chance” bank accounts and financial 
education. The program’s unique ten-month 
class component teaches unbanked citizens 
the financial benefits of using mainstream 
banking services. Currently, 11.4 percent 
of Norfolk residents are unbanked, and 
27.5 percent are under-banked. Bank On 
Norfolk helps reduce these percentages by 
connecting residents to financial institutions, 
providing comprehensive education on 
banking and budgeting, and building financial 
security by incentivizing savings. 

42

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYGOAL 2: Create Economic Opportunity by Advancing Efforts to Grow Existing Industries and New Sectors

Help stabilize families to build 
stronger neighborhoods. 
The Planning Council operates a 
program using housing specialists 
to reach out to landlords, identify 
housing available to low-income 
families, and build relationships to 
further expand rental opportunities 
for safe, affordable, and accessible 
housing. Housing specialists 
negotiate with landlords to help 
with the rental process, promote 
the use of the affordable housing 
website to landlords and property 
managers, provide ongoing tenant 
and landlord education, and work 
with tenants to help ensure housing 
stability. The goal of the program 
is to provide resilient housing 
opportunities and long-term 
housing stability for vulnerable 
residents. 
Timeline: This has been operational 
since 2012.

larger resilience goals of the 
city. Areas of development will 
include mixed financing and equity 
financing of affordable housing units, 
business creation and expansion 
using HUD entitlement funds, and 
community leadership support. 
Timeline: A request for proposals 
was released in October 2015.
Launch a new Affordable 
Housing Trust Fund. 
As Norfolk’s Plan to Reduce 
Poverty demonstrated, housing 
costs are a threat to neighborhood 
stability. The City of Norfolk is 
working with a consortium of 
private sector and nonprofit 
partners to launch a new 
Affordable Housing Trust Fund. In 
the city’s FY 2016 budget, Norfolk’s 
city council authorized funds to 
establish the trust fund. City staff 
are organizing an education series 
on housing trust funds for potential 
partners. The goal is to establish the 
operating principles and long-term, 
sustainable funding sources for the 
fund. 
Timeline:  A draft of operating 
principles for the fund will be 
completed by January 2016.

Resilience partners include: 
City of Norfolk
Mayor’s Commission on Poverty 
Reduction,

Norfolk Housing and Redevelopment 
Authority
The Planning Council.

RESILIENT CITY BUILDERS

In Park Place, a group of residents 
led by current School Board Chair 
Rodney Jordan partnered with 
the city to pursue a resident-
driven, healthy neighborhood 
approach to neighborhood 
revitalization and competitiveness. 
The effort led to the creation of 
the Greater Park Place Visioning 
and Engagement Process (VEP), 
which was the impetus for 
the city’s Neighbors Building 
Neighborhoods initiative. The 
VEP is a resident-led revitalization 
effort in which neighbors help 
neighbors create and implement 
a vision for growing their 
neighborhood by focusing on its 
strengths. By connecting neighbors 
around a vision of growing healthy 
internal and external partnerships, 
the residents of Park Place are  
creating a neighborhood 
where families will want to live, 
work, and play in Norfolk.

43

GOAL 2: Create Economic Opportunity by Advancing Efforts to Grow Existing Industries and New Sectors

STRATEGY 5:  Explore innovative financing methods.

Resourcing resilience solutions is one of the primary challenges cities face; Norfolk is no different. 
What makes Norfolk unique, however, is its commitment to developing new financing methods 
and refocusing existing resources to implement the city’s 45 resilience strategies. Norfolk and 
its partners are exploring innovative ways to capture the financial benefits of risk-reducing 
resilience investments to support additional investment in resilience efforts. 

Pioneer the creation of new risk 
reduction bond. 
Supported by The Rockefeller Foundation, 
the RE.bound Program, which brings together 
a team of private sector leaders, is taking 
steps to design a new catastrophe bond-like 
product that can promote project-based 
risk reduction solutions. These new types 
of instruments would realize the potential 
insurance benefits from infrastructure 
improvements and monetize the physical 
and financial risk reductions associated with 
investments in resilient systems, such as 
seawalls and green stormwater infrastructure. 
RE.bound intends to fix this problem by 
modeling the financial benefits of specific 
resilient infrastructure projects upfront 
and integrating insurance coverage with 
investment in long-term risk reduction. 
Norfolk’s departments of Budget and 
Strategic Planning and Finance are exploring 
how the RE.bound approach might help fund 
needed flood mitigation projects in the city.
Timeline: A complete review of the 
catastrophe bond process and its potential 
impact on the city’s overall fiscal position is 
underway. 
Investigate using social impact bonds to 
finance programs to advance social and 
economic resilience. 
The City of Norfolk is working with Social 
Finance, a 100RC platform partner, to 
investigate the use of social impact bonds 

Catastrophe Bonds
The private sector, philanthropy, and the 
City of Norfolk are driving innovation 
in capital markets. The city is applying 
lessons from The RE.bound Program 
to explore the use of a catastrophe 
bond-like product that reduces the city’s 
exposure to loss due from a disaster. This 
type of bond can provide cost-effective 
insurance and help mobilize resources to 
mitigate against insured risk. A city is able 
to access capital for mitigation without 
increasing debt. 

RE.invest
The RE.invest initiative is a collaboration 
among eight partner cities and leading 
engineering, law, and finance firms to 
create new public-private partnerships 
for resilient infrastructure. In Norfolk, the 
RE.invest initiative focused on integrated 
flood management solutions in the 
Arts District. Solutions included cost-
effective green infrastructure options and 
seawall upgrades to address frequent 
flooding that currently limits economic 
development. The team also identified 
relevant legal and financial mechanisms 
to support public and private 
investments in the innovative solutions.

ACTIONS

44

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYGOAL 2: Create Economic Opportunity by Advancing Efforts to Grow Existing Industries and New Sectors

to finance social service programs. Social 
impact bonds provide private investors with 
an opportunity to fund programs designed 
to create value or lessen the cost of city 
services. For example, a bond might fund a 
training program that helps residents obtain 
living-wage employment. Bond investors 
receive payments when program goals are 
met. 
Timeline: The initial workshop on social 
impact bonds with city staff and potential 
nonprofit and philanthropy partners will be 
held in 2016. 
Create new investment funds for local 
business. 
Norfolk’s Department of Development 
has created four new investment funds 
to support local businesses and local 
neighborhood revitalization projects. The 
Citywide Partnership Fund, the Global 
Initiatives Fund, the Norfolk Innovation Fund, 
and the Grow Norfolk fund provide $3 
million annually to start and grow existing 
businesses in Norfolk. These funds will 
spur business creation, business expansion, 
and revitalization of the city’s commercial 
corridors. As these funds grow, we will seek 
opportunities to give priority financing 
to businesses that advance the resilience 
themes of this strategy.
Timeline: This launched in July 2015. 

Resilience partners include: 
100 Resilient Cities
City of Norfolk  
The Rockefeller Foundation 
Social Finance

RESILIENT CITY BUILDERS

Antipas Harris is the President 
of GIELD, a nonprofit 
organization dedicated to 
developing quality leaders 
within the church and society. 
Dr. Harris is supporting the 
effort to connect local churches 
to Bank On Norfolk. Bank 
On helps unbanked or under-
banked residents connect to 
free or low-cost starter bank 
accounts and financial education. 
The local faith community will 
support the Bank On effort by 
providing matching dollars to 
incentivize residents to create 
emergency funds. By helping 
low-income residents save for 
emergencies, Dr. Harris and 
the Norfolk Senior Pastors’ 
Roundtable are building the 
city’s economic resilience.

45

GOAL 3: Advance Initiatives 
to Connect Communities, 
Deconcentrate Poverty, and 
Strengthen Neighborhoods

Together we are stronger. Whether 
conditions are good or challenging, we 
work better, are safer, and are more 
productive when we are connected, 
communicating, and supporting each 
other. As changing conditions lead to 
new ways of living and working, we are 
committed to building better by building 
together. We aspire to be a city where all 
residents are connected to the resources 
they need to be successful and are 
compelled to seize every opportunity to 
build our city into a great place to live, 
work, and play for all.
Connected neighbors build strong 

neighborhoods that are safer, deliver 
a higher quality of life for residents, 
and protect people better in times of 
emergency. Norfolk’s Neighbors Building 
Neighborhoods (NBN) initiative was 
built on the premise that more cohesive 
communities are safer, more prosperous 
communities, and on the fundamental 
belief that individuals are the catalysts 
for change in their communities. This 
plan seeks to complement and support 
the successful work accomplished 
and underway by NBN to strengthen 
communities and build resilience at the 
individual, neighborhood, and city level.

46

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYGOAL 3: Advance Initiatives to Connect Communities, Deconcentrate Poverty, and Strengthen Neighborhoods

STRATEGY 1:  Improve citizen access to information.

Timely access to accurate information is critical to an individual’s ability to make informed 
decisions—in good times and bad. By creating systems that can integrate and disseminate data 
into actionable information, Norfolk is developing the building blocks for information-based 
decision-making.

ACTIONS

Launch a state-of-the-art Resilience 
Dashboard. 
In close partnership with 100RC’s 
platform partner Palantir, a global data 
integration company, the City of Norfolk 
is pioneering a new resilience module to 
integrate key data, improve the city’s ability 
to respond to citizens today, and better 
plan for the future. The city’s Information 
Technology Department and Palantir 
have improved the city’s data integration, 
which gives users the ability to analyze 
information in a single platform. Dozens 
of staff in multiple departments, including 
Neighborhood Development, Planning, and 
Public Works, are using the dashboard to 
connect building, code violation, permitting, 
storm damage, and calls-for-service 
data to improve service delivery at the 
neighborhood level. Norfolk will capture 
lessons learned to help Palantir find ways 
to bring this new dashboard to other cities 
around the world.
Timeline: This launched
in 2015.
Raise awareness of risks and resources 
to keep persons and property safe 
during storms. 
The City of Norfolk has convened a 
working group of city staff and insurance, 
banking, planning, and community 
representatives to create a communications 

Palantir Data Analysis System
To help solve hard problems, Norfolk 
is working with Palantir, a data analytics 
company, to change the way the city 
uses information. By bringing together 
data on flooding, buildings, code 
violations, permits, and calls for service, 
staff can provide interested residents 
with a better understanding of what’s 
working well and what’s not working 
well in our neighborhoods. The city’s 
neighborhood specialists work with 
civic leagues to identify problems to be 
solved by analyzing what’s happening 
and why. Staff use neighborhood-specific, 
real-time information that connects 
events, places, and people to assist 
residents to take actions that make their 
communities stronger.

47

GOAL 3: Advance Initiatives to Connect Communities, Deconcentrate Poverty, and Strengthen Neighborhoods

RESILIENT CITY BUILDERS

Reduce barriers to banking 
and financial mainstream. 
The City of Norfolk is working 
with financial institutions 
and community groups to 
establish the Bank On Norfolk 
program. Bank On Norfolk 
takes a strategic approach to 
helping families build financial 
strength through connections 
to banking services, education, 
and mentoring. Bank On works 
with unbanked and under-
banked residents to increase 
the financial stability of low- to 
moderate-income families by 
connecting them to traditional 
financial services and providing 
them with alternatives to 
expensive financial transactions. 
Timeline: This will launch in 
winter 2016.

Resilience partners include: 
City of Norfolk
Faith community
Local banks
Local media outlets
Old Dominion University
Palantir

campaign to alert citizens 
to the risks of flooding. The 
campaign will raise awareness 
of risks and resources to aid 
residents in informed decision-
making during storms. The city 
will use city-owned media as 
well as local media to spread 
the word. 
Timeline: The campaign will 
launch in winter 2016.
Involve citizens in budget 
development. 
The city’s departments of 
Communications and Budget 
and Strategic Planning convene 
residents each year for 
conversations on the city’s 
budget. Over time, the focus of 
these gatherings has evolved 
from a summary of annual 
city spending to a discussion 
of the vision of Norfolk’s 
future and priorities. These 
conversations provide an 
opportunity for residents and 
city staff to work collectively 
in establishing priorities, and 
to implement plans that build 
on that collective vision. To 
date, more than 600 residents 
have participated in these 
conversations.
Timeline: Community 
conversations will be held 
during the fall and winter of 
2015 and 2016.

48

Jim Redick, Director of 
Emergency Prepared-ness 
and Response for the City of 
Norfolk, understands the power 
of collaboration. Through Team 
Norfolk, Jim brings together 
government, the private sector, 
nonprofits, the faith community, 
higher education, and the military. 
With these community partners, 
Jim  is building a collective effort 
to address all threats, including 
sea level rise. Jim believes 
connecting networks, forming 
relationships, and leveraging ideas 
and resources are key to building 
resilience. Beyond coordinating 
work in Norfolk, Jim serves as 
the chair of the Hampton Roads 
Sea Level Rise Preparedness and 
Resilience Intergovernmental Pilot 
Project, a White House initiative 
to coordinate “the whole of 
government” in planning for sea 
level rise. Jim is also co-chair of 
the Subcommittee on Recurrent 
Flooding, part of  Virginia’s 
Secure Commonwealth Panel.

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYGOAL 3: Advance Initiatives to Connect Communities, Deconcentrate Poverty, and Strengthen Neighborhoods

STRATEGY 2:  Support community-building efforts through 

technology.

Research confirms that connected, cohesive communities bounce back better from disruptive 
events. Advances in technology can help people more easily connect networks of people 
together. Norfolk will continue to build community by piloting new networking technologies that 
connect vulnerable populations with community and services.

ACTIONS

to these services is broadcast through 
websites and smartphone applications. 
Timeline: Launched in 2015.
Use technology to support local 
giving. 
Several local Boy Scout troops, 
Concursive, and community members 
have launched We Feed Norfolk. We 
Feed Norfolk uses mobile technology to 
communicate opportunities for residents 
to volunteer and give back to other 
residents. The pilot successfully engaged 
residents in donating over 3,500 pounds 
of food to the local food bank. The goal 
is to increase citizen participation in 
programs that support their communities, 
and the technology could be used in 
many different ways. 
Timeline: Ongoing. This launched in 2015.

Resilience partners include: 
City of Norfolk
Civic leagues 
Concursive
Faith-based community
FoodBank of Southeastern Virginia
Local Boy Scouts of America troops

Develop new technology to help 
residents support those in need. 
The City of Norfolk, local civic leagues, 
and local technology firm Concursive 
are working together to launch the 
Helping Hands program. Helping Hands 
is a smartphone app that connects small 
networks of residents as they support 
vulnerable neighbors during emergencies. 
The app provides information about 
emergency conditions and identifies 
resources to hyper-local networks 
available to assist at-risk neighbors when 
life-supporting services are disrupted 
by an event. This helps build community 
connection and ensure citizen safety 
while reducing burdens on emergency 
responders during emergencies. 
Timeline: This will launch in winter 2016.
Connect the faith community with 
emergency responders. 
The city’s faith-based community is 
working with the Norfolk Department of 
Emergency Preparedness and Response 
on Operation Brother’s Keeper. This 
initiative empowers neighborhood 
faith-based communities to support 
emergency preparedness efforts across 
the city. Faith-based institutions volunteer 
to act as communication and supply 
distribution centers and shelters, thereby 
ensuring the distribution of supplies and 
services at the neighborhood level during 
disasters. Information connecting residents 

49

GOAL 3: Advance Initiatives to Connect Communities, Deconcentrate Poverty, and Strengthen Neighborhoods

STRATEGY 3:  Connect the community through conversation.

The City of Norfolk is committed to continually improving methods for citizens to connect with 
each other and their government to define the city’s future. Norfolk believes that citizens who 
are engaged in building the vision for the future will be active in working to implement that 
vision.

Collaborate with residents to map 
neighborhood assets. 
The city’s Department of 
Neighborhood Development is helping 
residents map their neighborhood’s 
physical, social, and economic assets. 
This asset-mapping process will help 
the city identify those characteristics 
and places that make neighborhoods 
strong in good times, and provide 
crucial support in times of emergency. 
The city’s Neighbors Building 
Neighborhoods initiative will leverage 
this analysis to work with local 
communities to build neighborhoods 
of choice—places where people 
choose to live because of the high 
quality of life. 
Timeline: Community mapping 
sessions will be held in winter 2016.
Create new dialogues between the 
police and the community leaders.
 The city’s police department and 
community leaders are working 
together to build a stronger police-
community relationship. Community 
and police leaders engage in frank 
discussions about critical issues, 
including bias-free policing, use of 
force, and police recruiting. The goal is 
to create open lines of communication 
to ensure that the community 

and the police department are 
working together effectively to keep 
communities safe. 
Timeline: This program was launched 
in 2015.
Outreach through community 
events. 
Police Chief Michael Goldsmith 
and Neighborhood Development 
Director James Rogers have instituted 
“Hamburgers and Hotdogs with 
the Chief of Police” events. Chief 
Goldsmith and Rogers regularly meet 
with residents in neighborhood homes 
and parks and at neighborhood-
sponsored events to discuss important 
issues about the department’s 
interactions with citizens. The goal 
is for the chief to hear firsthand the 
concerns of residents and for residents 
to have a direct communication with 
the leadership of the force. 
Timeline: This launched in 2014.
Engage diverse voices through 
the Norfolk Senior Pastors’ 
Roundtable. 
The local faith-based community 
and city leaders have convened a 
pastoral roundtable. The roundtable 
meets frequently to discuss important 
community issues. These meetings act 

ACTIONS

50

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYGOAL 3: Advance Initiatives to Connect Communities, Deconcentrate Poverty, and Strengthen Neighborhoods

RESILIENT CITY BUILDERS

as an opportunity to listen, share, and 
vet ideas on topics of interest to the city 
and the faith-based community. The goal 
is to create consensus around and to 
collaboratively implement actions that 
drive positive change. Through roundtable 
discussions, local churches have agreed 
to raise funds to match savings of 
participants in the city’s Bank On Norfolk 
program.
Timeline: This initiative is already 
underway.

Resilience partners include: 
City of Norfolk
Civic leagues 
Faith-based community

The Norfolk Senior Pastors’ Roundtable 
The roundtable was established in January 
2015 and serves as a trusted environment 
that values and fosters frank discussions 
with faith-based partners about issues 
they find important for the thousands of 
residents they serve in the City of Norfolk. 
The roundtable provides the city manager 
with an opportunity to discuss important 
issues to better our city. The roundtable’s 
stated commitment is to work toward 
the well-being of the city, especially as 
it relates to social and economic justice 
and ethnic harmony. The meetings are 
held monthly and rotate among the city’s 
houses of worship. The pastors involved in 
the roundtable represent approximately 
15,000 congregants.

Dave Richards has lived in a 
number of Norfolk neighborhoods 
over the past 25 years and co-
owns Concursive, a technology 
company located in downtown 
Norfolk. Dave believes Norfolk 
should be the most connected city 
in the world, especially as it relates 
to “doing things that matter!” To 
jump-start that effort, he launched 
We Feed Norfolk, enlisting local 
Boy Scout troops 24 and 1 to 
collect food donations from area 
residents. The program distributes 
reusable bags to the front doors 
of Norfolk residents and asks 
them to sign up and download 
the We Feed Norfolk app on 
a smartphone. Dave and other 
volunteers send out a message 
alerting users that the Boy Scouts 
will be out collecting the bags 
full of food. Residents who want 
to participate leave the bag of 
food on their porch and press 
the app for a pickup. In just the 
three initial pilot runs, the program 
collected over 3,500 pounds of 
food for the region’s food bank.

51

What’s Next

Norfolk’s Resilience Strategy represents the first step toward creating and cultivating an ongoing 
resilience practice across the city. In addition to moving these strategies and actions forward, 
Norfolk’s Resilience Strategy will accomplish the following tasks over the next nine to twelve 
months:

• 

Identify and showcase a growing 
number of Norfolk’s Resilient City 
Builders, both organizational partners 
and individuals. Optimally, by July 
2016, we will have recognized one 
hundred people and organizations as 
Norfolk Resilient City Builders.

•  Establish a global practice on water 

innovation. Norfolk is a hub of 
activity for advancing next-generation 
thinking on living with the water. 
From the Dutch Dialogues to the 

Resilience Lab/Accelerator to the 
100RC exchange and community of 
practitioners, Norfolk will be a leading 
global thinker—and doer.

•  Partner with other 100RC network 

cities to create innovations in 
resilience. For example, the cities of 
New Orleans and Norfolk will partner 
on developing innovative financing to 
fund infrastructure improvements and 
accelerate economic vitality.

52

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYWhat’s Next

•  Hold the second Norfolk Resilient City 

Builder Summit event in July 2016. This event 
will bring together Norfolk’s Resilient City 
Builders to review and discuss our resilience 
planning efforts to date, including this strategy.

•  Measure the city’s resilience performance 

and institutionalize new practices by creating 
a resilience program performance dashboard 
and developing an ongoing communications 
system that will institutionalize resilience 
planning and implementation for centuries to 
come.

•  Continue to transform the way Norfolk 

does business.The future of Norfolk depends 
on putting in place resilience strategies 
that propel the city forward today and that 
efficiently activate in times of need to ensure 
the city stays safe and strong. By working 
together as a community and partnering 
with the expertise and resources available 
throughout 100RC, Norfolk is leading a 
movement to build resilient cities across 
the globe. Collectively, we are transforming 
the way our city works — collaboratively, 
proactively, thoughtfully, and inspired by an 
understanding that the challenges before 
us provide an opportunity to build an even 
better, more vibrant Norfolk for the next  
400 years. 

53

Norfolk 100RC Initiative 
Leadership

Resilience Steering Committee 
Members
Paul D. Fraim
Mayor, City of Norfolk
Shawn Avery
Opportunity, Inc.
Edna Baehre-Kolovani
Tidewater Community College
Ray Toll
Old Dominion University
William Crow
Virginia Ship Repair
Richard Homan, M.D.
Eastern Virginia Medical School
Marcus D. Jones
Norfolk City Manager
Randy Keaton
Hampton Roads Planning District  
Commission
Andria McClellan
Norfolk Planning Commission
Thaler McCormack
ForKids
Suzanne Puryear
The Planning Council
John Reinhart
Virginia Port Authority
Skip Stiles
Wetlands Watch
Theresa Whibley, M.D.
Norfolk City Council

 

Coastal Resilience Working Group 
Members
Richard Broad
City of Norfolk, Dept. of Public Works
Christy Everett
Chesapeake Bay Foundation
George Homewood
City of Norfolk, Dept. of Planning 
Marjorie Mayfield Jackson
Elizabeth River Project
Kristen Lentz
City of Norfolk, Dept. of Utilities 
54

Molly Mitchell
Virginia Institute of Marine Science
Eddie Redfearn
S.L. Nusbaum Insurance
Jim Redick
City of Norfolk, Dept. of Emergency  
Preparedness and Response
W. Craig Riley
Monarch Bank
John Stewart
Lafayette Wetlands Partnership
John White
City of Norfolk, Dept. of Public Works
Ron Williams
City of Norfolk, City Manager’s Office
Andrew Yancey
City of Norfolk, Dept. of 
Development

 

Neighborhood Resilience Working 
Group Members
Lori Crouch
City of Norfolk, City Manager’s Office
Tina Gill
The Up Center
Michael Goldsmith
City of Norfolk, Police Dept.
Stephen Hawks
City of Norfolk, Dept. of Human  
Services
George Homewood
City of Norfolk, Dept. of Planning
Demitria Lindsey, M.D.
Norfolk Department of Public Health
Shurl Montgomery
Norfolk Redevelopment and Housing  
Authority (Retired)
James Rogers
City of Norfolk, Dept. of Neighborhood 
Development
Randy Ross
Norfolk Federation of Civic Leagues
Denise Thompson
City of Norfolk, Dept. of Public Works

Mike Wasserberg
City of Norfolk, Office to End 
Homelessness
Jeff Wise
City of Norfolk, Dept. of Fire and Rescue

Economic Resilience Working Group 
Members
Barry Bishop
Greater Norfolk Corporation
William Crow
Virginia Ship Repair Association
Dan Cohen
City of Norfolk, Dept. of Economic  
Development
Robert Garris
Norfolk Economic Development Authority
Patricia Harrison, Ph.D.
City of Norfolk, Office of Budget and  
Strategic Planning
Richard Homan, M.D.
Eastern Virginia Medical School
Marty Kaszubowski
ODU Norfolk Innovation Center
Mary Miller
Downtown Norfolk Council
Zach Miller
HATCH
Sarah Parker
City of Norfolk, Dept. of Economic  
Development
Susan Perry, Ph.D.
City of Norfolk, Mayor’s Commission on 
Poverty Reduction
John Porter
Entrepreneur
Don Ingerson
Titan Virginia
Bryan Stephens
Hampton Roads Chamber of Commerce
Robert Sharak
Opportunity Inc.

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYNorfolk 100 Resilient Cities Leadership

We also would like to thank the following dedicated contributors: 

Working Group Contributors
Leo Adriaanse
Mason Andrews
John Atkinson
Ramona Austin
Mac Ball
Bob Batcher
Joshua Behr
Sam Belfield
Juvarya Beltkamp
Wynter Benda
Joe Bouchard
John Broderick
Peter Chapman
Chesterfield Heights Civic League
Stephen Conrad
Michelle Covi
Robert Crum
Caroline Deitrich
Rafael Diaz
Ramiro Diaz
Piet Dircke
East Ocean View Civic League
Mudje Ertan-Unal
Jeremy Forest
Adam Frank
Vlad Gavrilovic
Adrian Gheorghe
Ray Gindroz
Jamie Goldin
Richard Goll
Jennifer Graeff
Michelle Hamor
David Harnage
James Herbst
JanDirk Hoekstra
Oneiceia Howard
Hannah Hoyt
Shereen Hughes
Robert Jeffers
Michelle Johnson
Peter Johnston

Steve Jones
Sabrina Joy-Hogg
Alex Kaplan
Whitney Katchmark
John Kownack
Bruce Lawlor
Jonathan Lester
Miranda Luna
John Macomber
Jeremy Maloney
Sarene Marshall
John Martin
Kaye Matheny
Brenden McEneaney
Ben McFarlane
John McIlwain
Tom McNeilan
Jonathan Miller
Dale Morris
Paul Moyer
Rhonda Murray
Leonard Newcomb
Paul Olsen
Howard Passell
Thaddeus Pawlowski
Fraser Picard
Mel Price
Carlton “Ray” Ransom
David Richards
Craig Richardson
Joe Rieger
Capt. Jorge Rios
Paul Robinson
Burrell Saunders
Charles Schilke
Jeremy Sharp
Paula Shea
Beth Silverman
Steven Slabbers
Scott Smith
Kyle Spencer
South Brambleton Civic League

Dave Stebbins
Mary-Carson Stiff
Roelof Stuurman
Cheryll Sumner
Hannah Teicher
Sas Terpstra
Steve Van Leeuwen
Drew Ungvarsky
Shalini Vajjhala
Jaap van den Bout
Jan van der Grift
Jaap van der Salm
Jarda van Spengen
Peter van Veelen
Kyle Vangel
Juvarya Veltkamp
David Waggonner
Alex Wall
Edgar Westerhof
Morgan Whayland
John White
Thom White
Lindsay Woodson
Wie Yusuf
Kevin Zerbe
 
Norfolk Office of  
Resilience:
Christine Morris, Chief Resilience 
Officer
Katerina Oskarsson, Management  
Analyst III
Jessica Dennis, City Manager Fellow

55

Acknowledgments

Norfolk: Resilient City was achieved through 
the collaborative insights and efforts 
of the community of Norfolk, including 
citizens, city staff, experts, advisors, and 
supporters. We are indebted to those who 
created the strong and extensive body of 
work on which this strategy is built. We 
are grateful for the opportunity to add 
to this previous work and believe that 
the strategy advances the city’s vision.

100 Resilient Cities, with the support of 
The Rockefeller Foundation, was a driving 
force behind the process that created 
Norfolk: Resilient City. We especially 
wish to thank Dr. Judith Rodin for her 
transformative vision that formed the basis 
for the 100RC initiative. With this vision, 
Dr. Rodin, Patrick Brennan, Dr. Nancy 
Kete, and Sam Carter have breathed life 
into the 100RC initiative and created a 
movement for city-based resilience. 

We wish to thank the 100RC staff for the 
tremendous support they have provided 
throughout the strategy development 
process, especially Michael Berkowitz, Amy 
Armstrong, Andrew Salkin, Paul Nelson, 
Leah Flax, and Max Young. Their energy, 
expertise, and nimbleness were essential 
to the development of this strategy.

The 100RC network of chief resilience 
officers deserves special thanks for 
their guidance, counsel, and support. 
The incredible work being done 
by chief resilience officers around 
the world inspired this strategy.

Finally, a special thanks goes to our 
strategy partner, HR&A Advisors, who 
guided, synthesized, and sharpened our 
strategy process and this final document 
in ways too numerous to recount.

56

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITYReferences

About 100RC

Graphics
Map: Norfolk and the World. 100 Resilient Cities.

Introduction
---
Norfolk: Past, Present, Future
Climate Change in Hampton Roads Phase II: Storm Surge Vulnerability and Public 

Outreach. (June 2011) Hampton Roads Planning District Commission. 

Climate Change in Hampton Roads: Impacts and Stakeholder Involvement. 

(February 2010) Hampton Roads Planning District Commission. 

Climate Change in Hampton Roads: Phase III: Sea Level Rise in Hampton Roads. 

(July 2012) Hampton Roads Planning District Commission. 

Coastal Resilience: Adapting to Climate Change in Hampton Roads. (July 

2013) Hampton Roads Planning District Commission.

Dutch Dialogues in Virginia. (June 2015) Life at Sea Level. http://www.lifeatsealevel.org/.
Economic Impact of the Department of Defense in Hampton Roads. (October 

2013) Hampton Roads Planning District Commission. 

Entrepreneurship Study Group Report. (September 2014) Hampton Roads 

Community Foundation: Reinvent Hampton Roads. 

Global Metro Monitor. (January 2015) Brookings Institution. http://www.brookings.edu/.
Hampton Roads Military Transportation Needs Study: Highway Network Analysis. 

(2011) Hampton Roads Transportation Planning Organization. 

Hampton Roads Military Transportation Needs Study: Roadways Serving the Military and Sea Level 

Rise/Storm Surge. (July 2013) Hampton Roads Transportation Planning Organization.

Homeowners Insurance Changes in Coastal Virginia: Causes and Consequences for Shoreline 

Communities. (July 2013) Wetlands Watch. http://www.wetlandswatch.org/. 

Industry Cluster Study Group Report. (October 2014) Hampton Roads 

Community Foundation: Reinvent Hampton Roads. 

Norfolk City Report. (2015) RE.invest Initiative. http://www.reinvestinitiative.org/. 
Norfolk Coastal Resilience Strategy. (2014) City of Norfolk. http://www.norfolk.gov/.
Norfolk Plan to Reduce Poverty. (June 2014) City of Norfolk. http://www.norfolk.gov/.
North Atlantic Coast Comprehensive Study. (January 2015) U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Nuisance Flooding and Increasing Problem as Coastal Sea Level Rise. (July 

2014) National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 

PlaNorfolk 2030. (Last update - May 2015) City of Norfolk. http://www.norfolk.gov/.
Recommendation to the Secure Commonwealth Panel on the Issue of Sea Level Rise and 
Recurrent Flooding in Coastal Virginia. (September 2014) Recurrent Flooding Sub-Panel.

Recurrent Flooding Study for Tidewater Virginia. (January 2013) Virginia Institute for Maritime Studies. 
Repository of Storm Water Engineering Studies. (2008-2015) City of Norfolk. http://www.norfolk.gov/.

57

References

Resilience Technical Panel Report for Fort Norfolk. (December 2014) Urban Land Institute. http://uli.org/. 
Storm Surge Report: Residential Storm-Surge Exposure Estimates for 10 U.S. Cities. (2011) Core Logic.  
Structures of Coastal Resilience Norfolk Case Study. (June 2014) Structures of 

Coastal Resilience. http://structuresofcoastalresilience.org/. 

The Challenge of Mitigating Virginia’s Flooding and Sea Level Rise Impacts. (November 

2014) Wetlands Watch. http://www.wetlandswatch.org/.

The Potential Economic Impact of Hurricanes on Hampton Roads. (July 2006) Hampton Roads Planning District Commission.
U.S. Climate Resilience Toolkit. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. https://toolkit.climate.gov/. 
Virginia and the Surging Sea. (September 2014) Climate Central. http://www.climatecentral.org/. 
Workforce Development Study Group Report. (October 2014) Hampton 

Roads Community Foundation: Reinvent Hampton Roads. 

Graphics
Image: Norfolk in 1892. City of Norfolk.
Image: Norfolk Today. City of Norfolk. 
Map: Median Household Income. U.S. Census Bureau 2009-2013 ACS.  
Map: Norfolk’s Original 50 Acres Overlaid with the Current City. City of Norfolk. 
Map: Norfolk Railway and Naval Transportation Connectivity. Waggoner & Ball Architects.
Chart: Average City Wages for Growing and Declining Industries (2014). EMSI.
Chart: Water Level Elevations of Significant Storms since 1933 at Sewells Point Tide Gauge. NOAA.
Chart: Norfolk Jobs by Sector (2014). EMSI.
Chart: Norfolk Job Change by Sector (2001-2014). EMSI.
Chart: Poverty by Race. U.S. Census Bureau 2009-2013 ACS.  
Chart: Projected Sea Level Rise Measured at Sewell’s Point Station (1992 – 2100). USACE.
Chart: Share of Population by Race. U.S. Census Bureau 2009-2013 ACS.  

Norfolk’s Resilience Strategy Guiding Tenets
Graphics
Image: 100 Resilient Cities Framework. Arup.

Norfolk’s Resilience Strategy Planning Process
Palantir Technologies. https://www.palantir.com/.
Sandia National Laboratories. http://www.sandia.gov/cities/.
Graphics
Image: 100 Resilient Cities Kickoff Workshop (February 27, 2014). City of Norfolk.

Norfolk’s Strategic Resilience Framework 
Dutch Dialogues in Virginia. (June 2015) Life At Sea Level. http://www.lifeatsealevel.org/. 
Graphics
Image: Arts District Better Block. City of Norfolk.
Image: Virginia Dutch Dialogues: Vision of Newton Creek Watershed. (June 2015) Waggonner & Ball Architects.
Image: Universal Screening and Referral Pilot. Hampton Roads Chamber
Image: Palantir Data System. Palantir.

What’s Next
---

58

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITY59

N   RFOLKRESILIENTCITY