SEATTLE—
FUTURE CITY:
RESILIENCE  
ROADMAP

SEATTLE—
FUTURE CITY:
RESILIENCE  
ROADMAP

FRAMEWORK: 
4 CHAPTERS, 
15 GOALS,  
69 ACTIONS.

5

GOAL 1
Closing the Opportunity Gap

PAGE 18

GOAL 2
Creating Pathways to Jobs

PAGE 22

GOAL 3
Prepare All Seattle Workers for the Jobs of the Future 

PAGE 26

CHAPTER 1 
BUILDING 
OPPORTUNITY

GOAL 4
Building More Affordable Housing 

PAGE 32

GOAL 5
Preventing Displacement

PAGE 38

CHAPTER 2 
MAKING SEATTLE MORE  
AFFORDABLE FOR ALL

GOAL 6
Creating a Connected and Affordable Transportation Network

PAGE 44

GOAL 7
Helping Residents Meet their Basic Needs

PAGE 48

GOAL 8
Correcting Historic Injustices in the Criminal Justice System

PAGE 54

CHAPTER 3 
CREATING A CITY WHERE 
EVERYONE IS WELCOME 

GOAL 9
Protecting Our Most Vulnerable Communities

PAGE 60

GOAL 10
Standing Up for All of Seattle’s Workers

PAGE 64

GOAL 11
Serving As A Model Employer By Driving Equitable Outcomes

PAGE 68

GOAL 12
Re-imagining and Enhancing Our Civic Treasures

PAGE 74

GOAL 13
Meeting the Needs of Our Growing City

PAGE 78

GOAL 14
Combatting Climate Change 

PAGE 82

GOAL 15
Harnessing The Power of Partnerships

PAGE 86

CHAPTER 4 
FOSTERING  
GENERATIONAL  
INVESTMENTS

6

MESSAGE FROM  
MAYOR JENNY A. DURKAN

While we know Seattle is a city of the future, we also know 
our City has its challenges. We want to ensure that our city 
continues to be a place where everyone feels welcome and 
safe. A place where they can thrive by finding a job close to 
their home in a welcoming neighborhood, and where they 
know that the roots they put down will endure, so that their 
children can grow up and continue to call Seattle home. This 
roadmap, graciously supported by The Rockefeller Foun-
dation, is a set of holistic strategies to address many of the 
complex challenges facing our City. From affordable housing 
to climate change, from living-wage jobs to high-speed, con-
nected transit—and everything in between, Seattle is ready to 
address some of the toughest challenges facing our cities. 

Together, progress on all these fronts will help us realize 
our shared vision for building a city of the future. This is 
what progress looks like: providing more affordable housing 
in every part of this city and making meaningful progress 
on homelessness; creating true economic opportunity 
for young people and all workers, who continue to make 
us the city that invents the future; advancing public 
safety, justice, and equity, as we continue to dismantle 
institutional racism and bigotry that is a barrier to social 
justice; building civic treasures, public spaces and more 
green parks that everyone can enjoy – especially the next 
generation; and connecting all of it with world-class transit 
and other safe transportation choices. We can put all 
these ideas—big and small—into action to help people.

In the last decade, Seattle has become the fastest 
growing city in America. We have been fortunate that 
our region has become a magnet for so much incredible 
talent. This means that for many, Seattle is a place where 
opportunity is all around them. Where they can find a job 
that provides for them and their families, and where they 
can put their skills to good use. But that’s not the case for 
everyone – that’s why one of my main priorities is to build 
opportunity for our children, our youth, and everyone in our 
City. Whether it’s providing free college to help close the 
opportunity gap for underrepresented groups in our public 
education system or providing on-the-job skills building 
and retraining opportunities for workers, we are looking 
at ways to give everyone in our City the tools they need to 
access the incredible opportunities available in our City. 

That’s what building a city of the future is all about.

Sincerely,

Jenny A. Durkan 
Mayor of Seattle

“WE ARE STRONG,  
RESILIENT,  
DETERMINED,  
INNOVATIVE, 
GENEROUS,  
AND, FRANKLY...
THE BEST  
DAMN CITY  
ANYWHERE.”
MAYOR JENNY DURKAN,  
SEATTLE STATE OF 
THE CITY, 2018

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

7

MICHAEL BERKOWITZ, 
PRESIDENT, 100RC  

MESSAGE FROM 100 RESILIENT  
CITIES (100RC) 

On behalf of 100 Resilient Cities (100RC), a program pioneered 
by The Rockefeller Foundation, congratulations to Mayor Jenny 
Durkan, Chief Resilience Officer Katya Sienkiewicz, and the City of 
Seattle on the release of Seattle—Future City: Resilience Roadmap. 

This roadmap provides an initial path forward as the City aims 
to build a more resilient future by addressing current and future 
shocks and stresses. The tactics outlined in this document will 
help Seattle increase access to economic opportunity, promote 
affordability, foster a welcoming city for all, and catalyze critical 
investments to accommodate growth and address climate change.

We are particularly excited about Seattle’s innovative approach-
es toward preparing workers and training youth for the jobs 
of the future. Taken together, the educational and workforce 
training programs described throughout this document will 
help equip all residents with the skills they will need to face 
challenges such as automation and a changing workplace. 

Since Seattle joined the 100RC Network in 2016, 100RC has 
partnered with the City to provide technical support and resources 
to create this roadmap and address its resilience challenges. 
In addition, as a 100RC Network member, Seattle has had the 
opportunity to exchange best practices with other cities across 
the globe that are addressing similar shocks and stresses. Some 
of these collaborations have helped inspire initiatives described 
in this roadmap—for example, those related to the future of work. 
We were also proud that Seattle joined our conference in late 2018 
to advance more equitable and resilient cities. At this network 
exchange, Seattle was able to share with other 100RC cities its 
groundbreaking work to date in embedding practices that foster 
racial equity, while drawing inspiration from innovative work in 
cities ranging from Los Angeles to Greater Manchester, UK.

While the release of this roadmap marks a critical mile-
stone in the City’s resilience journey, the work is far from 
over—and successful implementation will require dedication 
and partnership across all sectors. As this work continues, 
we are eager to see how this roadmap propels the City 
toward a more resilient future for all Seattle residents.

Sincerely,

Michael Berkowitz 
President, 100 Resilient Cities

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

8

EXECUTIVE  
SUMMARY 

Seattle has always been a city that invents the future. 
From our early days as a logging town to our current 
status as the fastest-growing city in America, Seattle has 
been the birthplace of some of our country’s greatest 
innovations. The city has changed the way people live, 
work, travel, and of course, drink their morning coffee. 

Situated on land inhabited for thousands of years by indigenous 
peoples from the Suqamish, Duwamish, Nisqually, Snoqualmie, 
and Muckleshoot (Ilalkoamish, Stuckamish, and Skopamish) 
tribes, Seattle has a rich cultural fabric and deep roots of 
resilience. Despite losing much of their land and population to 
non-native settlers, their rich and complex cultural, social, and 
economic structures are still present and have become a vital 
and active part of Seattle’s civic, cultural, and economic life. 

This rich history served as the foundation for an entrepre-
neurial spirit and a sense of communal resilience for later 
generations. When the city burned to the ground in the Great 
Fire of 1889, enterprising residents rebuilt it better than 
before. When Seattle’s leaders were faced with the challenge 
of welcoming thousands of new families chasing opportunity 
during the gold rush of the early 1900s, they literally moved 
the earth to reshape Seattle into the city that it is today.

Although our challenges today are different than the ones early 
Seattle settlers faced, they are no less significant. Today, our 
challenge is to harness the power of our strong economic 
and population growth for the benefit of all current and future 
Seattle residents. Great prosperity and opportunity for some 
have led to great inequality for others. We must intentionally 
work to keep Seattle a city where all residents have access 
to opportunity, can live affordably, and feel welcome.

To achieve this, we must address the key challenges that threaten 
Seattle’s resilience. We must continue to prepare for acute shocks—
events that could threaten our City’s ability to function, such as 
natural disasters. We must also address chronic stresses—chal-
lenges that weaken our natural, built, or human resources, such 
as income inequality and chronic homelessness. Stresses often 
exacerbate the effects of shocks when they occur, particularly for 
vulnerable populations. For Seattle, this means working to mitigate 
the impacts of, and protect residents from, earthquakes, localized 
flooding, and wildfire smoke. At the same time, we must design 
policies and initiatives to improve affordability for low-income 
residents, make transportation more efficient and accessible, 
eliminate the opportunity gap, and remove structural inequities.

CITY OF SEATTLE

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

9

SEATTLE  
TODAY

1

Fastest-growing 
city in America

Population 

730,400
108languages spoken 
18%
96% of residents live within a 
20%
34.7%of Seattle’s population 

10 minute walk of a park

in Seattle Schools

are people of color

of Seattle’s popula-
tion is foreign born

of people of color live 
in poverty, Compared  
to 9% of Whites

One in six households spend more 
than half of their incomes on housing

highest average household 
income of top 30 cities 

5TH
7TH

19.2%

increase in jobs 
2005 to 2015

largest hub nationally for tech 
startups and home to world’s 2 
largest public cloud services 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

10

SEATTLE’S RESILIENCE 
JOURNEY

Seattle’s location and rapid population boom have 
resulted in unique risks and vulnerabilities that impact our 
ability to maintain and deepen our city’s resilience. Over 
the last decade, Seattle has been the fastest-growing 
big city in America, growing from 608,660 people in 
2010 to 730,400 in 2018.2 This growth has brought 
with it an amazing amount of diversity, adding to 
our city’s vibrant and inclusive communities. More 
than 108 languages are spoken in our schools.3

The Seattle housing market, however, has struggled to 
keep pace with this significant growth. Our beautiful 
natural terrain—with Puget Sound bordering Seattle 
on the west and mountains, rivers, and lakes providing 
natural borders on all the other sides—presents one 
of our city’s greatest challenges. Building new housing 
for our growing population and keeping housing 
affordable are difficult without the space to expand. 
Housing construction only grew by 13% from 2010 
to 2018 , causing home prices to jump nearly 93% 
over the roughly decade-long period between the 
bottom of the housing crisis and January 2018.4

As a result, one in six Seattle households is severely 
burdened by the cost of housing, spending more than 
half its income on housing, and we have seen growing 
rates of homelessness over the last decade. A recent 
report from the University of Washington disclosed 
that the amount a family of four needs to “scrape 
by” in Seattle has risen 86% from 2001 to 2017.5

While an abundant natural resource base, environmen-
tal amenities, a seaport location, a highly educated 
workforce, and a critical mass of globally recognized, 
export-oriented companies have enabled the Seattle 
region’s economy to flourish over the last half-century, 
the benefits of this significant growth have not been 
realized by everyone. Average household income is 
the fifth highest of the top 30 largest cities in America, 
but approximately 20% of Seattle’s people of color 
live in poverty, compared to approximately 9% of Se-
attle’s white residents.6 In terms of income inequality, 
Seattle ranks 18 out of the 50 largest U.S. cities.7

This income inequality is exacerbated by a persistent gap 
in access to opportunity for Seattle residents. Seattle 
is the epicenter for much of the global innovation that 
is happening today: from Amazon, Boeing, Starbucks, 
Microsoft, Costco, Expedia, Alaska Airlines and more. The 
area has seen a 21% increase in jobs since 2011, but we 
know that many Seattle residents do not have access 
to these high-paying jobs that require a college degree. 
Only 26% of black/African American, native Hawaiian/
other Pacific Islander, Latino, and American Indian/Alaska 

native students in Washington State earn a college 
degree compared to 46% of their white counterparts.8 

Seattle’s recent growth has also strained its infra-
structure systems, leading to traffic congestion and 
highlighting a need for more efficient and environmentally 
friendly transportation options. More than a quarter of 
Seattle’s population still commute by driving alone. 

We recognize that the negative impacts of reduced 
affordability and access to opportunities are felt more 
acutely by Seattle’s residents of color: 78.6% of African 
American renters said it was unlikely that they would 
be able to afford living in Seattle in 5 years, compared 
to 65% of white renters.9 We are focused on correcting 
racial inequity and acknowledging Seattle’s past with 
regard to racist and exclusionary practices and their 
ripple effects today. We are committed to partnering with 
community organizations to rectify this moving forward. 

More than 2,000 residents were engaged to 
identify our most critical challenges.

Seattle is ready to face these challenges. Over the past 
decade, we have invested billions across the city in 
affordable homes and specifically invested almost $232 
million in rental and home ownership, and business 
support to our neighborhoods recently designated as 
“opportunity zones.” Increasingly, our transit options are 
diversifying away from our strained highway system and 
connecting with populations centers to include light rail, 
electric buses and biking to preserve our environment for 
future generations. To counter the strain on housing and 
continue to cultivate the amenities that make Seattle so 
livable, we are expanding affordable housing in creative 
ways, exploring the conversion former military bases 
or surplus government property as well as facilitating 
accessory dwelling unit (ADU) development. We are 
focused on accessible preschool, healthy food options, 
walkability, co-working spaces, and accessibility to 
our 412 hiking and biking trails, dog parks, skate parks, 
playgrounds, as well as neighborhood community centers. 

Seattle residents are also committed to investing in cre-
ating the future Seattle needs. In the last decade, alone, 
residents approved more than $1.8 billion for education 
since 2010 through the Seattle School District Operations 
levy; a total of $851 million from the Families and Educa-
tion and the Families, Education, Preschool, and Promise 
(FEPP) Levy votes in 2011 and 2018, respectively; $58 
million in 2014 from the Preschool Program Levy; a total 
of $335 million from renewal of the Low-Income Housing 
levy  (votes in 2009 and 2016); approximately $149 
million from increased vehicle license fees (since 2015); 
and a sales tax increment of approximately $127 million 
(since 2015) to pay for enhanced bus service from Metro. 
Likewise, throughout the region, we have already been 
making progress toward a resilient future for Seattle.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

11

We must build off these successful efforts to continue to address our key resilience challenges, including lack of 
affordable housing and child care, traffic congestion, structural inequity, and the needs of the different groups of residents 
experiencing homelessness. To this end, this resilience roadmap will focus on four key pillars of Seattle’s resilient future:

BUILDING 
OPPORTUNITY:

Seattle needs to be a city where everyone has 
access to the opportunities created by our strong 
economy. This can be achieved by providing college 
to all Seattle youth, working diligently to close the 
opportunity gap by addressing the root causes such 
as access to child care and preschool, connecting 
people to jobs and training opportunities, and pre-
paring our youth for the future of work in Seattle.

CREATING A CITY 
WHERE EVERYONE 
IS WELCOME: 

We must continue to celebrate and embrace diversity 
in Seattle by ensuring everyone can feel welcome. We 
need to focus on correcting historic injustices in the 
criminal justice system, protection or most vulner-
able communities, standing up for our workers and 
making sure the City serves as a model employer.

MAKING SEATTLE 
MORE AFFORDABLE 
FOR ALL: 

Seattle’s attractiveness as a place to live should not 
displace longtime residents or discourage people to live 
here because of the high-cost of living. We must work to 
make Seattle not just an attractive place to live, but also 
an affordable one. To do this, we need to create more 
affordable housing, create policies to reduce displace-
ment, improve access to affordable public transportation, 
and continue to connect residents with benefits.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

FOSTERING 
GENERATIONAL 
INVESTMENTS:

Seattle’s growth and high quality of life need to be pre-
served for future generations. We must preserve our civic 
treasures, continue to meet the needs of our growing city, 
and invest in making a more vibrant city for generations 
to come. This includes protecting our natural environment 
by committing to becoming carbon neutral by 2050. 

12

EXISTING  
RESILIENCE  
EFFORTS

Seattle Housing Affordability and Livability Agenda

Final Advisory Committee Recommendations 
To Mayor Edward B. Murray and the Seattle City Council

July 13, 2015

HOUSING  
AFFORDABILITY AND 
LIVABILITY AGENDA
Throughout the years, 
Seattle has contin-
uously reinvented 
how it houses its 
residents and the way 
it fosters the livability 
of distinctive, vibrant 
neighborhoods to 
promote quality of life, 
walkability, access 
to efficient public 
transit, parks and the 
cultural amenities 
that enrich urban life. 
The Housing Afford-
ability and Livability 
Agenda recommends 
initiatives that have 
the greatest potential 
to impact housing 
affordability in Seattle.

A Comprehensive Plan for Managing Growth
2015-2035 | Draft

City of Seattle
Department of Planning and Development
July 8, 2015

SEATTLE 2035— 
SEATTLE  
COMPREHENSIVE 
PLAN
Since the Seattle 
Comprehensive Plan 
was first adopted in 
1994, it has embraced 
the concept of sustain-
able growth, meaning 
that as the city grows, 
it can accommodate 
incoming residents 
and businesses, all 
while maintaining and 
enhancing resources 
for the future. This 
Plan, which is periodi-
cally updated, provides 
long-term guidance 
that will help the City 
make decisions that 
enable sustainable 
growth. The next 
update process will 
being this year.

RACE AND  
SOCIAL JUSTICE 
INITIATIVE
Throughout the history 
of the United States, 
people and communi-
ties of color have been 
constantly oppressed 
by the government. 
The Race and Social 
Justice Initiative 
contains four strate-
gies to help people of 
color in Seattle achieve 
equality in their daily 
lives, from building 
an anti-racist network 
within City government 
to transforming the 
internal government 
culture of the City 
toward one rooted in 
racial justice, human-
istic relationships, be-
longing, and wellbeing.

EQUITY &  
ENVIRONMENT  
AGENDA
The Equity & Envi-
ronment Agenda is a 
blueprint to advance 
racial equity in Seattle’s 
environmental work. 
The Agenda lays out 
four key goal areas 
and recommended 
strategies in each 
area related to healthy 
environments, jobs, 
equity, and commu-
nity leadership.

AFFORDABLE  
MIDDLE-INCOME 
HOUSING ADVISORY 
COUNCIL
The Affordable Mid-
dle-Income Housing 
Advisory Council aims 
to create more housing 
choices for Seattle’s 
middle-income 
earners. The Advi-
sory Council brings 
expertise in invest-
ment and housing 
development and will 
make recommenda-
tions based on both 
economic analysis 
and engagement with 
communities through-
out our city. They will 
elevate investment 
strategies and inno-
vative construction 
models to close the 
growing gap between 
housing that City 
subsidy may support 
and what the private 
market is producing.

Growth and Equity

Analyzing Impacts on Displacement and Opportunity

Related to Seattle’s Growth Strategy

SEAWALL PROJECT
Seattle’s seawall was 
originally built over 70 
years ago. In 2017, the 
city completed major 
elements of the Sea-
wall Project. The new 
Seawall protects public 
safety, meets current 
seismic standards, 
improves the salmon 
migration corridor, 
and serves as the 
foundation of Seattle’s 
future waterfront. 

Seattle’s Housing Choices

Seattle Planning Commission Report
July 2003

HOUSING  
CHOICES REPORT
Following the Com-
prehensive Plan, the 
Planning Commissions 
recognized the need 
for more affordable 
housing in the 
community as well 
as a broader range 
of housing options. 
The Housing Choices 
Report contains 
results of the public 
process Commission 
sponsored with the 
City’s Department 
of Construction 
and Land Use.

May 2016

Seattle
Office of Planning &
Community Development

SEATTLE 2035 
EQUITY ANALYSIS
The Seattle 2035 
Equity Analysis report 
provides analysis of 
some of the ways that 
the growth strategies 
listed in the Environ-
mental Impact State-
ment could affect the 
city’s disadvantaged 
populations. It pulls 
information described 
in the Comprehensive 
Plan in order to 
create the analysis.

SHIVA – The Seattle Hazard Identification 
& Vulnerability Analysis 
City of Seattle, Office of Emergency Management 

(206) 233-5076 

http://www.seattle.gov/emergency 

4/15/2014 

 

 

 

 

 

SEATTLE HAZARD 
IDENTIFICATION  
VULNERABILITY 
ASSESSMENT
Seattle is constantly 
threatened by natural 
disasters, ranging from 
violent earthquakes to 
blinding snowstorms. 
The Seattle Hazard 
Identification Vulner-
ability Assessment 
report identifies the 
hazards and examines 
their consequences in 
order better prepare 
for future disasters.

OPQ

Sustainability Plan – 2019 Update
Building a better tomorrow

January 2019

SOUND TRANSIT’S  
SUSTAINABILITY 
PLAN
Sound Transit’s 
Sustainability Plan 
identifies how the 
transportation provider 
can not only provide 
affordable, reliable 
transportation options 
to the Central Puget 
Sound region, but 
also improve quality 
of life and protect 
the environment.

Seattle Climate Action

April 2018 

SEATTLE CLIMATE 
ACTION
The City of Seattle is 
committed to meeting 
the goals of the Paris 
Climate Agreement 
by making choices 
necessary to care 
for their community, 
their economy and the 
planet today and for 
the future. The focus 
of Seattle’s Climate 
Action strategy is 
improving the effi-
ciency of energy use 
in the transportation 
system and buildings.

13

EQUITABLE  
DEVELOPMENT  
INITIATIVE
The Equitable De-
velopment Initiative 
envisions Seattle 
as a diverse city 
where all residents 
can achieve their full 
potential regardless 
of race or means. The 
organization funds 
organizations working 
in the City on anti-dis-
placement strategies 
and economic devel-
opment opportunities. 
To date, this initiative 
has invested $21 
million in projects.

SMALL BUSINESS 
ADVISORY  
COUNCIL
To better understand 
the challenges facing 
our City’s small 
business commu-
nity, Mayor Durkan 
established Seattle’s 
first Small Business 
Advisory Council 
(SBAC). SBAC is tasked 
with ensuring that 
small businesses both 
have a role in informing 
policies and programs, 
and access to re-
sources. The Council 
will provide input on 
the impact of City 
decisions, make policy 
recommendations, 
and help increase 
access to tools and 
resources available 
to small businesses.  

14

LOS ANGELES has 
formed a multi-million 
dollar, public-private 
partnership with 
L.A. County, the 
California Community 
Foundation, and the 
Wingart Foundation 
to promote due 
justice by promoting 
access to counsel 
and representation 
for those dealing with 
immigration court 
removal hearings. 

OAKLAND 
launched a program 
called Class-
rooms2Careers, a 
year-round program 
that combines 
student financial 
assistance, relevant 
work experience, 
and career-oriented 
academic curriculum 
to the benefit of both 
students and partic-
ipating companies. 

VANCOUVER is 
improving building 
performance to less-
en the impact from 
earthquakes. Current-
ly, Canadian building 
code only requires 
that new buildings do 
not collapse during 
earthquakes. How-
ever, Vancouver will 
implement a recov-
ery-based design that 
ensures a building 
is, not just standing, 
but also operable 
after an earthquake.

NETWORK 
INSPIRATION

QUITO has recently 
built its first metro 
line improving region-
al transportation. The 
creation of this line is 
key to building urban 
resilience through 
transit oriented 
development and im-
proving accessibility.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

15

NEW YORK CITY 
is on track to become 
the first major U.S. 
city to implement 
congestion pricing 
to improve travel 
through congested 
city streets while 
also raising funds 
for public transit 
improvements. 

ATLANTA aims to 
end chronic home-
lessness in the city 
by 2020. To achieve 
this it is focusing 
on programs that 
improve access to 
permeant housing 
for homeless families 
and individuals.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

WASHINGTON, DC  
strives to grow 
automation-resistant 
industries that have 
large growth potential 
to ensure high quality 
jobs for all education 
backgrounds and 
withstand negative 
impacts from auto-
mation. To achieve 
this, the City will form 
new partnerships in 
all sectors to train 
residents in skills that 
are valuable for high-
wage, high-demand 
jobs and resistant 
to automation.

16

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

17

CHAPTER 1:  
BUILDING  
OPPORTUNITY

Seattle has grown faster than any other city in America in the past decade. This incredible growth has brought with it 
incredible opportunity—and incredible challenges. The addition of tens of thousands of high-paying technology jobs in our 
city has led to unimaginable prosperity for some – but not everyone is benefitting equally from our region’s economic boom. 
We thrive when the diversity of workers, from our maritime and port workers to nurses and firefighters and teachers can 
continue to call Seattle home. To ensure that Seattle is a truly resilient city and to address growing economic inequality, 
we are making significant investments in social service, workforce development, and youth opportunity programs.

In Seattle, the challenge of closing the opportunity gap is compounded by Washington State’s education fund-
ing structure. Funding comes from three sources: the State Legislature, a levy by Seattle Public Schools, and a 
levy by the City of Seattle. Under this structure, Washington State is responsible for funding “basic” education 
needs, such as teacher salaries, while local levy funds are intended to improve the quality of education services 
based on local priorities. However, due to consistent shortfalls at the state funding level, local levies have often 
been used to make up for these gaps in basic funding. Seattle residents have consistently voted for high-qual-
ity education levies, proving their dedication to quality education and opportunity for Seattle’s youth.

The historic passage of Mayor Durkan’s Families, Education, Preschool, and Promise (FEPP) Levy in 2018 pre-
sented a historic opportunity for the City to improve Seattle residents’ preschool through career-preparation 
experience. Seattle is working to close the opportunity gap through strong early education programs and invest-
ments in K-12, college preparation, and job readiness programs. The City is also investing in physical and mental 
health services and postsecondary education through the Seattle Promise program. These are some of the ways 
that the City plans to ensure that Seattle’s youth are prepared to take on the high-paying jobs of the future.
“The City of Seattle must play an active role in reducing and removing financial 
barriers that keep our high school graduates from going to college or getting the 
technical training. They need this education to have a shot at good, family-wage 
jobs. This will not just be good for our students; it will be great for Seattle. It will 
help channel the prosperity of our thriving economy back into our community 
and let us start filling thousands of job openings with our home-grown talent. 
Creating the Seattle Promise will build economic opportunity through education 
and help to make progress to reduce the opportunity gap for students of color.” 
—Mayor Durkan

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

SAFE ANDTHRIVING SEATTLEGOAL 1: EDUCATE AND ENGAGE ANGELENOS AROUND RISK REDUCTION AND PREPAREDNESS SO THEY CAN BE SELF-SUFFICIENT FOR AT LEAST SEVEN TO 14 DAYS AFTER A MAJOR SHOCK GOAL 2: DEVELOP ADDITIONAL PATHWAYS TO EMPLOYMENT AND THE DELIVERY OF FINANCIAL LITERACY TOOLS TO SUPPORT OUR MOST VULNERABLE ANGELENOS GOAL 3: CULTIVATE LEADERSHIP, STEWARDSHIP, AND EQUITY WITH YOUNG ANGELENOS18

GOAL 1.  
CLOSING THE  
OPPORTUNITY GAP

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

1SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP1.1

INVEST IN HIGH-QUALITY EARLY LEARNING SERVICES 
THAT PREPARE CHILDREN FOR SUCCESS

19

Closing the opportunity gap starts 
with high-quality early learning 
services. We know that children with 
access to high-quality pre-K and day 
care are better prepared for a life of 
continued learning and success. 

Investments from Mayor Durkan’s 
Families, Education, Preschool, and 
Promise (FEPP) Levy will nearly 
double the number of kids who are 
able to attend the Seattle Preschool 
Program (SPP), from 1,500 children 
in 2018-2019 to 2,700 in 2025-2026, 
and expand the SPP to 28 new class-
rooms. In the past 4 years, SPP has 
proven that to be successful, it must 

be flexible and responsive to the 
community. These investments will 
help SPP maintain its high standards 
of quality while incorporating a more 
flexible design that allows them to 
reduce barriers to entry and enhance 
alignment between partnerships.

While these investments will 
help expand access to preschool 
programs, a shortage of childcare 
facilities presents a challenge for 
families even before pre-K begins. In 
an attempt to counter this shortage, 
the City of Seattle’s Child Care Bonus 
Program invests capital funds in 
the development of new childcare 

facilities in Seattle, which are funded 
through developer mitigation con-
tributions that offset the additional 
need for childcare services due to 
the increased size of the commercial 
developments that choose to 
participate in the City’s program. 
Many of the centers, current and 
proposed, are located on or near 
light-rail stations. All of the centers 
are required to be in operation for no 
less than 20 years, and 20% of the 
children served annually must be 
from families with incomes that are 
less than 80% of the area median.

1.2

PROMOTE HIGH SCHOOL GRADUATION THROUGH 
COLLEGE AND JOB READINESS PROGRAMS 

Since 2014, more than 75% of the stu-
dents in Seattle’s public schools grad-
uate on time each year, and rates con-
tinue to improve. In fact, 4-year high 
school graduation rates improved from 
nearly 73% in 2013 to 79% in 2017. 

students. Such gaps have proven 
persistent and must be addressed in 
order to reduce disparities in educa-
tional attainment, promote equitable 
local economic development, and 
support the state’s workforce needs.

However, when graduation rates are 
disaggregated by race, significant 
opportunity gaps become evident. In 
2016, on-time graduation rates for 
black, Latino, and American/Indian/
Alaskan Native students in Seattle 
Public Schools were 70%, 63%, and 
55% respectively, compared to 84% 
for white students and 81% for Asian 

To complement early learning funding 
and K-12 investments, Mayor Durkan’s 
FEPP Levy funds research-based 
interventions targeting academic 
preparation and social, emotional, and 
behavioral skill building to encourage 
better high school graduation rates 
and prepare students for college and 
careers. Supplemental services using 

culturally and linguistically responsive 
approaches designed to close oppor-
tunity gaps for historically underserved 
students, schools, and communities 
are also being funded. A key element 
of K-12 FEPP Levy investments is 
providing access to expanded learning 
opportunities, including high-quality 
before- and after-school, summer, and 
other out-of-school learning experi-
ences that support the development 
of academic, social, emotional, and 
physical interests of students.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP20

1.3

SUPPORT LEARNING THROUGH  
MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES

Physical and mental health services 
have proven to be critical support 
services that are necessary to help 
students achieve academic success. 
Since the passing of the first Fami-
lies and Education Levy in 1990, the 
City has invested in health services. 

Starting with the first school-based 
health center at Rainier Beach 
High School, this programming has 
expanded over the years to include 
health centers in 25 elementary, 

middle, and high schools. These 
investments have funded school 
nursing, an oral health pilot, and 
health system enhancements across 
the school system. The City partners 
with Public Health—Seattle & King 
County to manage the investments 
that provide support to community 
providers and Seattle Public Schools.

These K-12 student health invest-
ments are designed to increase 
access to comprehensive medical 

and mental health care and other 
services; promote early interven-
tion, prevention, and treatment of 
health-related barriers to learning 
and life success; and increase the 
number of students that graduate 
prepared for the postsecondary 
pathway of their choice.

1.4

PROVIDE COLLEGE FOR ALL SEATTLE YOUTH

The rising cost of a college degree 
has meant that many Seattle high 
school graduates are unable to 
pursue the kind of advanced degree 
necessary to start a career in a 
highly competitive market. According 
to projections, Washington State 
is expected to add 740,000 jobs 
in the next 5 years. A majority of 
these jobs will require some sort of 
postsecondary degree or credential, 
yet currently only 31% of Washington 
State’s high school students go on to 
attain a postsecondary credential by 

the age of 26. In Seattle, preparing 
our youth to be ready to take on 
these jobs is a priority.On her second 
day in office, Mayor Durkan signed 
an executive order to create the 
Seattle Promise College Tuition 
Program10 and expand free access 
to college for Seattle public school 
students. With funding for this 
initiative integrated into the Families, 
Education, Preschool, and Promise 
(FEPP) Levy, these postsecondary 
investments provide students with 
access to a college pathway—in-

cluding tuition, wraparound student 
support services, and non-tuition 
financial support—that leads to a 
certificate, credential, or degree. 

Beginning in the fall of 2019, all 
Seattle Public Schools graduates will 
be able to attend any of the Seattle 
colleges for 2 years tuition-free. 
Annually, this initiative will serve 
approximately 1,360 high school 
students in college prep courses and 
870 Seattle Promise college students.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP21

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

22

GOAL 2.  
CREATING  
PATHWAYS TO JOBS

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP23

2.1

CREATE AND SUPPORT CAREER 
PATHWAYS FOR NEW EMPLOYEES 

Creating a pathway to true oppor-
tunity doesn’t end with a credential 
or a college degree. To create 
lasting opportunity, we also need 
to support our youth by creating 
a pathway to good careers.

The Opportunity Promise program—
an extension of the Seattle Promise 
scholarship program—is providing 
current Seattle Promise scholars 
with paid internships at some of 
our region’s top companies. Alaska 

Airlines, Amazon, Expedia, BECU, and 
many others are already participating 
in the Opportunity Promise program, 
and this is just the beginning. 
Our goal is to have this program 
available to interested Seattle 
Promise scholars by summer 2020. 

Similarly, in partnership with one 
of the region’s largest health-care 
providers, Seattle has piloted a new 
accelerated training program that 
prepares low-income job seekers 

for careers in health care. Using an 
employer-designed curriculum, job-
seekers receive the skills and support 
needed to enter and build a founda-
tion for a health-care career. Seattle 
hopes to replicate and grow these 
partnerships with other employers 
in the region. In addition, Seattle has 
also piloted a new grant program to 
expand Career Experiences for Youth. 

2.2

EMPOWER ALL WORKERS IN A CHANGING 
WORKFORCE THROUGH PROGRAMS THAT TRAIN 
AND UPSKILL INCUMBENT WORKERS

In the past several decades, the 
American workforce has shifted 
away from a model of lifelong 
employment with structured, 
predictable career advancement 
toward one with shorter tenures at 
a series of companies. This rise in 
“nontraditional” career paths means 
that incumbent workers with focused 

skill sets are often at a disadvantage 
in a competitive labor market.

Seattle is advancing the training 
needs of youth and low-income 
working adults by increasing oppor-
tunities for more individuals to gain a 
postsecondary credential. Our Center 
of Working Adults initiative with the 
Seattle College District provides 

education that is accessible and in 
worker-friendly formats (including 
online and hybrid courses). We plan 
to increase the number of course 
offerings and enrollments in these 
programs, and are evaluating the 
expansion of apprenticeship and 
pre-apprenticeship programs.

2.3

SUPPORT TRAINING, CAREER NAVIGATION, AND 
WRAPAROUND SERVICES FOR INDIVIDUALS WHO 
ARE EXPERIENCING BARRIERS TO EMPLOYMENT

While Seattle’s strong economy and 
robust labor market have made our 
city a magnet for many high-skilled 
workers from across the country and 
around the world, few of the jobs being 
created are available to individuals 
facing barriers to employment.

By offering training, case management, 
and support, we are enabling more 
people to connect to careers. Seattle 
has collaborated with other regional 
partners to better address gaps in 
services for specific populations. 
Data-informed funding of workforce 

services will ensure that those 
who are underserved receive the 
employment supports needed.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP24

2.4

PROVIDE JOB AND SKILL BUILDING OPPORTUNITIES 
FOR SEATTLE YOUTH THROUGH CITY PROGRAMS

For more than 50 years, the Seattle 
Youth Employment Program (SYEP) 
has provided summer jobs to 
Seattle’s most under-served young 
people, ages 16 to 24. While this 
program has long been successful 
in providing valuable training, good 
pay, and a safe place to be for our 
youth, in 2019 we are expanding 
SYEP to help students better prepare 
for twenty-first-century work. 

Starting in fall 2019, SYEP partici-
pants will be enrolled in a year-round 
program that provides mentorship 
and skills training throughout the 
year, culminating in a summer 

internship, which in turn will lead into 
an alumnae community. By shifting 
to a development-focused model 
for our largest youth internship 
program, we can provide training 
that connects to the next step in their 
career.In order to connect Seattle’s 
youth with the living-wage jobs of the 
future, the first ever Career Connect-
ed Learning Grants were announced 
in May 2019. These will fund nine 
local organizations to increase the 
job readiness competencies of 
youth ages 14 to 24 and will  reach 
an estimated 700 young adults with 
career experiences. The nine pro-
grams will lead Seattle youth through 

hands-on trainings, workshops, tours, 
and more, all aimed at building job 
competencies while introducing 
youth to high-demand careers in the 
information technology (IT), health 
care, and maritime sectors. The grant 
awarded to Seattle Public Schools’ 
Health Services Pathway Program, 
for example, will increase Seattle 
Public Schools’ capacity to educate 
its youth about careers in the local 
health-care industry and embed 
career learning into its curriculum.

2.5

CREATE A YOUTH PORTAL TO INCREASE 
ENROLLMENT IN OPPORTUNITIES AT THE CITY

We know that many of the pro-
grams that our city offers lead to 
good outcomes for the youth who 
participate, but very few of these 
programs consistently operate at 
full capacity. To ensure that as many 
Seattle youth have access to these 
programs as possible, we are looking 
at ways to make it easy for young 
people ages 16 to 24 to access these 

job and skill-building opportunities, 
to develop skills over time, and to 
plan for an economically secure 
and personally empowering career.

In addition to improved outreach and 
expanded programs, we are part-
nering with the Mayor’s Innovation 
Advisory Council to create an online 
youth opportunity portal to help us 

reach this goal. Future functions 
we hope to add to the youth portal 
include the following: access a jobs 
board with external youth employ-
ment and training opportunities; 
locate non-employment youth 
services in their area; create a profile 
with a résumé and skills bank; and 
create education and employment 
plans using labor market data. 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

25

GOODWILL’S YOUTH 
MARITIME PROGRAM 
Goodwill’s Youth Maritime Program helps prepare 
high school seniors for a career in the maritime 
industry. This 2-year, free program for qualifying 
students provides them a smooth transition 
through their senior year in high school toward 
college readiness. It helps build strong soft skills 
and connects students with future career maritime 
opportunities. It also includes ongoing support 
and Saturday workshops throughout the students’ 
senior year to ensure they are on track for high 
school graduation and ready for college programs 
in maritime pathways. Program participants are 
eligible for up to four quarters of maritime classes 
at area colleges, a summer internship, and ongoing 
college and career navigation and support services.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

26

GOAL 3.  
PREPARE ALL  
SEATTLE WORKERS  
FOR THE JOBS  
OF THE FUTURE 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

27

3.1

PREPARE SEATTLE’S WORKFORCE FOR THE INCREASING 
AUTOMATION OF SERVICE-RELATED JOBS 

The creation of increasingly special-
ized robots and sophisticated artifi-
cial intelligence is putting more jobs 
at risk of automation and changing 
the face of the American workplace 
as we know it. According to a study 
of 702 occupational groupings, 47% 
of U.S. workers have a high proba-
bility of seeing their jobs automated 
over the next 20 years.11 This 
disruption is also expected to impact 
low-wage earners disproportionately, 
as food preparation, office admin-
istration, and transportation jobs 

are taken over by machines, which 
will potentially leave those workers 
unemployable. This situation is likely 
to exacerbate income inequality and 
must be consciously planned for now. 

often require advanced degrees, 
which further underscores the 
importance of Seattle’s work to close 
the opportunity gap and provide 
ongoing training for its workers. 

To reduce the impact of automation 
on Seattle residents and help prevent 
significant layoffs among low-wage 
workers, Seattle needs to provide 
its workforce with opportunities to 
further hone their skills and take 
on the kinds of jobs less suited to 
automation. These are the jobs that 

Nearly all jobs will feel the pressure 
of automation at some point in the 
future. Thus, continued training 
and a flexible, adaptive, and 
creative workforce will be critical 
to ensuring Seattle workers don’t 
just survive but continue to thrive.

FUTURE OF WORK 
SUB-CABINET
The City’s Future of Work Subcab-
inet focuses on building a robust 
local talent pipeline, creating 
sustainable opportunities for 
Seattle’s youth, and addressing the 
challenges facing Seattle and its 
residents from increasing automa-
tion. In 2018, the Future of Work 
Subcabinet focused on building a 
unified development continuum 
for youth, aligning siloed programs 
into a common vision. The sub-
cabinet carries that work forward 
in 2019 while also pursuing a 
new policy agenda of expanding 
worker protections and access to 
economic opportunity for adults 
working in the gig economy—an 
increasingly large section of the 
adult working population in our 
city and all U.S. cities. 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

28

3.2

CREATE A SERIES OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
THAT WILL ADDRESS THE UNIQUE CHALLENGES 
OF GIG ECONOMY WORKERS

In the past decade, the rise of 
non-standard employment and gig 
economy workers has provided 
people with more opportunities than 
ever to make additional income to 
support their hobbies, their families, 
and themselves. These same gig 
economy jobs have also introduced 

new challenges relating to worker 
protections and labor standards. 

The Office of Labor Standards, Office 
of Economic Development, and the 
Office of the Mayor are working with 
workers on app-based platforms 
to develop recommendations for 
ensuring workers in this large section 

of the economy can continue to 
work, live, and thrive in our city. 
Recommendations may include 
clarifying labor standards for app-
based platforms and increasing 
opportunities to access education 
and training for workers looking to 
transition from the gig economy 
into other employment sectors.

3.3

ESTABLISH WORKER PROTECTIONS FOR 
NONTRADITIONAL “PLATFORM” WORKERS

With a wide variety of revenue-gen-
erating opportunities available to 
workers through platforms like 
Uber, Lyft, and Instacart, many 
workers are now generating a 
substantial portion of their income 
through these applications.

Workers in the platform economy 
experience poor working condi-
tions, such as low pay rates, tip 
theft, and constantly changing job 

requirements. Platform workers 
are also more likely to report 
living in poverty or receiving public 
assistance. Put simply, the social 
safety net of workplace protections 
developed in the twentieth century 
is no longer available for many 
twenty-first century workers. 

The City has begun outreach efforts 
to affected workers to better under-
stand how platform work impacts 

low-wage workers, particularly 
workers of color, immigrants, and 
refugees. Specifically, the City has 
worked with the University of Wash-
ington and Working Washington, a 
workers’ rights organization based in 
Seattle, to identify affected workers 
and convene focus groups to 
discuss the benefits and challenges 
of platform work, and to develop 
the best possible policy solutions.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP29

WORKING WASHINGTON

Working Washington, a 
workers’ rights organization 
based in Seattle, is building a 
powerful workers’ movement 
that aims to dramatically 
improve wages and working 
conditions for low-income 
workers and change the 
national conversation 

about wealth, inequality, and the value of work. 

Working Washington fast-food strikers sparked the 
fight that won Seattle’s first-in-the-nation $15 minimum 
wage. Working Washington made history once more 
when the City of Seattle passed secure scheduling in 
Seattle to provide employees with more information 
and advance notice regarding their work schedules.

Working Washington also led the Pay Up campaign, a 
national effort sparked by Instacart workers who organized 
to take back their tips and to push back against pay 
cuts. This effort has led to numerous groundbreaking 
actions to advance labor standards at the local, state, 
and corporate levels. For more information about 
Working Washington, check out workingWA.org.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

30

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

31

CHAPTER 2:  
MAKING SEATTLE 
MORE AFFORDABLE 
FOR ALL

Seattle’s recent economic growth has brought tremendous opportunity and prosperity to the region—but it 
has also created a dire need for more housing choices that are affordable for low-, moderate-, and middle-in-
come households. If Seattle is to remain an equitable, welcoming, and just city, we must create more housing 
options so that people who work in Seattle can live in Seattle and benefit from all our city has to offer. 

A booming population has also put stress on our neighborhoods and infrastructure and led to an increase 
in the cost of living. With limited space for expanding due to Seattle’s geographical challenges, many 
communities have experienced rapid densification and gentrification of their neighborhoods. 

Cities are constantly changing and evolving, and Seattle is no different. At the same time as we are wel-
coming new residents and supporting these high-skilled workers, we must also make intentional invest-
ments that help us preserve a strong community that remains open to working families, including our 
teachers, firefighters, nurses, and the thousands of others that keep our small businesses going. 

“We need more housing for our low- and middle-income Seattleites who have 
raised their kids here, but now see a city where those kids can’t afford to live.
As we create new opportunities in every part of this city, we must ensure a mix 
of housing units from deeply affordable to market rate while creating more 
affordable spaces for small businesses, community organizations or artists.
Everyone has to be welcome in every part of our city.”

- From the Mayor’s 2019 State of the City  
 (lightly edited for clarity)

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

SAFE ANDTHRIVING SEATTLEGOAL 1: EDUCATE AND ENGAGE ANGELENOS AROUND RISK REDUCTION AND PREPAREDNESS SO THEY CAN BE SELF-SUFFICIENT FOR AT LEAST SEVEN TO 14 DAYS AFTER A MAJOR SHOCK GOAL 2: DEVELOP ADDITIONAL PATHWAYS TO EMPLOYMENT AND THE DELIVERY OF FINANCIAL LITERACY TOOLS TO SUPPORT OUR MOST VULNERABLE ANGELENOS GOAL 3: CULTIVATE LEADERSHIP, STEWARDSHIP, AND EQUITY WITH YOUNG ANGELENOS32

GOAL 4.  
BUILDING MORE  
AFFORDABLE  
HOUSING  

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

33

4.1

PREVENT EVICTION AND DISPLACEMENT SO SEATTLE 
RESIDENTS CAN STAY IN THEIR CURRENT HOUSING

Increasing housing costs, rising 
property taxes, and a stressed 
housing market have all contributed 
to an increase in homelessness in 
Seattle. Together, these stresses 
have also made it more difficult for 
renters and homeowners on a fixed 
income to remain in their homes. 
The City of Seattle is working to help 
support residents to maintain and 
remain in their current housing, and 
to prevent them from falling into 
homelessness or being displaced.

new law and making additional 
reforms to protect renters, such 
as preventing domestic violence 
survivors from being held liable for 
property damage caused by their 
abusers. Seattle is also investing 
in more community-driven projects 
through the expansion of the 
Equitable Development Initiative 
(EDI), investing $5 million per year 
in Seattle’s existing community 
members and businesses in high-dis-
placement-risk neighborhoods.

strategies to increase access to the 
City’s affordability benefits—including 
rental assistance—for lower-income, 
housing-cost-burdened households. 
This program, the Seattle Rental 
Housing Assistance Pilot Program, 
specifically focused on preventing 
households with incomes between 
0% to 50% of the area median in-
come and that are on the waitlist for 
a Housing Choice voucher from fall-
ing into homelessness while on the 
waitlist for longer-term assistance. 

To do this, the City is strengthening 
the Just Cause Eviction Ordinance 
to align with the Washington State’s 

In her first official action, Mayor 
Durkan signed an executive order12 
to quickly develop and implement 

4.2

BUILD MORE HOUSING FOR FAMILIES OF ALL INCOME LEVELS 
TO HELP SEATTLE KEEP UP WITH INCREASED DEMAND

Truly addressing the housing 
shortage and affordability crisis in 
Seattle means adding more homes 
at all incomes levels. By providing 
a mix of housing types at prices 
people at all levels of income, both 
homeowners and renters are able 
to find homes they can afford. 

With increased investment, the City 
will build housing for Seattle’s most 
vulnerable residents experiencing 
homelessness and for workers 
and families earning less than 
$88,250 for a family of four. Seattle 
is proposing to double the City’s 
homeownership opportunities, 
and with the Mayor’s Affordable 

Middle-Income Housing Advisory 
Council, the City is ¬aiming to find 
private market solutions to help 
middle-income families stay in 
Seattle and have housing choices.

Recent investments include a plan to 
rezone nearly a third of the 34-acre 
Fort Lawton property in North 
Seattle, adding up to 238 ne units of 
mixed-income affordable housing, 
including supportive housing for 
seniors and veterans, apartments 
for low-income households, and 
opportunities for homeownership. On 
July 1, 2019, the Seattle City Council 
approved legislation that could 
make it easier to build accessory 

dwelling units (ADUs)—for example, 
backyard cottages and mother-in-
law apartments—which have the 
potential to provide new housing 
opportunities in neighborhoods 
where single-family homes are often 
unaffordable for many people. If just 
5% of eligible lots in the city built 
ADUs, about 4,000 new affordable 
housing units would be created. 

The City currently supports the 
operation of approximately 2,000 
units of permanent supportive 
housing. Since 2017, the City has 
made unprecedented investments 
in creating 630 new units of 
permanent supportive housing.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP34

URBAN SUSTAINABILITY 
ACCELERATOR 
Through September 2019, the Office of Planning 
and Community Development is leading an inter-
departmental team with representatives from the 
Seattle Department of Construction and Inspec-
tions, the Seattle Office of Housing, the Planning 
Commission, and Council Staff in participating in 
the Urban Sustainability Accelerator program, a 
year-long collaboration of city and county teams from 
across the country working to promote accessory 
dwelling units (ADUs). The team’s work will focus 
on programmatic ideas that align with addressing 
the challenges we hear from homeowners and 
will prioritize programs that further racial equity.

BRING SEATTLE’S BUSINESS, 
PHILANTHROPY AND NON-PROFIT 
PARTNERS TOGETHER TO FIND 
CREATIVE SOLUTIONS TO OUR 
SHARED HOUSING CRISIS 
Seattle’s shared housing crisis cannot be solved by gov-
ernment alone. As we attempt to build more affordable 
housing, we must leverage the creative potential of part-
ners all across our city. Many of Seattle’s largest business 
and non-profit partners have already started pitching in: 

 · Plymouth Housing, a Seattle nonprofit that has created 
and operated supportive housing for homeless adults 
for almost 40 years, has raised close to $50 million 
from businesses and philanthropy to expand its share 
of homes for extremely low-income residents; 

 ·

In January 2019 Microsoft made a $500 million 
commitment to fund projects that create and 
preserve affordable housing in the Puget Sound 
region in an attempt to curb the housing crisis; and 

 · Amazon has helped to support nonprofits Fare-
start and Mary’s Place by providing them with a 
combined 60,000+ square feet of space in the 
buildings of their South Lake Union campus.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

35

4.3 INCREASE THE DIVERSITY OF HOUSING FINANCING SOURCES

One of the primary challenges 
related to building more affordable 
housing is finding sustainable, 
long-term funding sources for an 
ever-increasing need. Building 
affordable housing developments 
requires a large amount of upfront 
capital, and affordable housing 

with ongoing resident services 
requires sustained funding.

In 2019, leaders in Olympia acted on 
a City of Seattle priority to approve 
more resources to build and operate 
affordable housing. They approved 

a bill to allow cities like Seattle 
to retain more sales tax to fund 
affordable housing. This legislation 
authorizes cities and counties to use 
a local sales tax, credited against 
their state sales tax, for affordable 
and/or supportive housing. 

4.4

ACQUIRE LAND STRATEGICALLY, WITH AN EYE  
TOWARD EQUITY AND FUTURE AFFORDABILITY

Strategic land acquisition provides 
an opportunity to secure land for 
affordable housing development 
both in areas of the city with low 
access to affordable housing 
options and in neighborhoods with 
high displacement risk. Affordable 
development on publicly owned sites 
includes community engagement to 
identify priorities for housing and any 
commercial and community spaces.

The Office of Housing (OH) is 
developing partnerships, including 
one with the Sound Transit regional 
transit agency, to explore opportu-
nities to leverage publicly owned 
sites at a free or reduced cost. This 
will help to decrease the overall 
cost of development of permanently 
affordable homeownership oppor-
tunities around Seattle. Work is 
under way with community-based 
organizations, particularly in areas 
with a high displacement risk, to 

ensure sites are developed in 
alignment with the community vision 
to meet neighborhood needs. 

OH has also developed a funding 
policy that allows for strategic 
acquisition of key sites for future 
development. The policy also 
allows for acquisitions to preserve 
existing buildings with expiring 
subsidies to prevent displacement 
of low-income residents.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP36

SUPPORTING RESIDENTS  
EXPERIENCING HOMELESSNESS  
AND PROTECTING THOSE AT RISK

Homelessness is a systemic problem that touches 
not just every city in the Puget Sound region, but 
every major U.S. city. While there are many root 
causes, in many cases adverse life events such as a 
health issue, the loss of a job, or the need to escape 
a domestic violence situation can quickly catapult our 
neighbors into homelessness. These root causes are 
inherently interconnected, and for our unsheltered 
neighbor, many factors compound one another to make 
homelessness an ongoing struggle to overcome. 

While Seattle has the largest concentration of individ-
uals experiencing homelessness in our region, this 
shared crisis is a regional problem that demands a 
regional response. As with most of our resilience 
challenges, it is increasingly important to coordinate 
efforts and investments countywide to best serve 
those in need. We are continuing to make significant 
investments in addressing homelessness that are 
having positive impacts for Seattle residents. 

Create a Regional Governance Structure 
to Respond to Homelessness 
On May 3, 2018, King County and the City of Seattle 
signed a Memorandum of Understanding to increase co-
ordination of homeless services, to cooperate on planning 
and reporting, and to set a path for governance reforms 
to better coordinate investments region-wide. The 
agreement also establishes the Homeless Services and 
Housing Governance Partnership between King County, 
Seattle, All Home (the federally recognized Seattle/King 
County Continuum of Care responsible for coordinating 
homeless service investments in the King County region), 
and regional partners to improve outcomes and account-
ability. On December 19, 2018, the Mayor and County 
Executive further endorsed a plan to create a Regional 
Authority, setting the path for greater regional coopera-
tion to make homelessness rare, brief, and nonrecurring.

The new governance partnership will 
take on the following tasks: 

 · Create a single Regional Authority that will align 

funding across the region and ensure a more 
efficient and effective response to homelessness.

 · Set principles and outcomes that a new 

system governing homeless services and 
housing investments should address. 

 · Focus on results to achieve housing and sup-

port services impacts on their customers. 

 · Work with cities, providers and other regional part-
ners to ensure coordinated investments provide a 
comprehensive network of services countywide. 

 · Consider models governing public health, homeless 

services and housing investments in other U.S. cities to 
explore best practices that can increase success here. 

 · Establish shared budget priorities and joint 
planning efforts to meet the needs of King 
County and Seattle’s homeless populations. 

Implement Seattle’s First-Ever 
Performance-Based Contracting for 
Homeless Services and Housing Providers  
In 2018, to address the overarching failure to achieve 
the new standards adopted in 2017, the City’s Human 
Services Department implemented performance-based 
contracting and developed benchmarks that serve as 
service points for homeless service providers. The new 
benchmarks will reduce contract payments when provid-
ers fail to meet performance benchmarks and will reward 
providers for improvement over the course of a year. 
While this new policy has challenged the prior culture of 
providers driving their program outcomes, the shift to 
openly discussing the need for data-driven contracting as 
well as the obstacles providers face in meeting targets 
has already resulted in more efficiencies and improve-
ments by homeless services and housing providers.  

Expand the Navigation Team to Connect 
More People with Services and Help 
Them Move into Safer Places
In June 2019, Mayor Durkan announced the addition of 
four new members to the Navigation Team, bringing the 
total to 38 under Mayor Durkan’s tenure. The Navigation 
team is a specially trained team of outreach workers, 
paired with Seattle Police Department personnel, to con-
nect unsheltered people to housing and critical resources 
while helping to address pervasive challenges around the 
issue of homelessness in Seattle. The addition allows 
the Navigation Team to now connect people to services 
7 days a week. Two of these positions are newly created 
System Navigators who will help provide outreach 
services and shelter referrals to people living unsheltered, 
whether in the right-of-way or in large encampments.  

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

Increase Services for People  
Experiencing Homelessness  
Over the past year, the City of Seattle has taken some 
important steps to address homelessness, and we 
know we are having an impact. In 2018, more than 4,200 
households moved from homelessness to housing 
or were prevented from becoming homeless. Mayor 
Durkan increased the investment in enhanced shelter, 
which provides 24/7 access to shelter and services 
and increased exits to permanent housing, by 88% in 
2018 over 2017. As part of the Mayor’s Path to 500, a 
plan that creates additional shelter capacity for more 
than 500 people, 516 new safe spaces have been 
added to our system, increasing access to services and 
housing opportunities. Still, every night, too many of our 
neighbors sleep outside without shelter, in inhumane 
and dangerous conditions. We have an obligation to 
bring more people off the streets and into safer places. 

Pilot a Safe Parking Site for  
Residents Experiencing Homelessness
In the 2019 budget, Mayor Durkan provided $250,000 
for a Safe Parking pilot to provide a safe and secure 
place to park overnight, accompanied by case manage-
ment, for people living in their cars. Participants in this 
pilot will focus on reestablishing permanent housing. 
This pilot is designed based on the best practices of 
successful programs in San Diego and Santa Barbara. 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

37

Remediate Hazardous and  
Predatory RV Vehicle Rental 
In June 2019, Mayor Durkan announced new steps to 
stem the supply of hazardous vehicles by preventing the 
resale of towed cars and recreational vehicles (RVs) and 
preventing the rental of hazardous vehicles to vulnerable 
individuals. Under the current process, derelict vehicles 
may be, in some instances, returned to the market after 
being towed. The goal of this initiative is to decrease the 
number of vehicles that pose significant public health and 
safety risks. After a vehicle is towed, public health criteria 
will be used to evaluate the safety of a vehicle in the tow 
yard. Those deemed uninhabitable will not be allowed 
to reenter the market through the auction process.

Additionally, the Mayor has transmitted legislation to 
amend the Seattle Municipal Code to prohibit the rental of 
unsafe vehicles. The proposed amendment would include 
restitution for the person paying rent to live in the vehicle. 
These new steps will complement the work of the RV Re-
mediation Program established by Mayor Durkan in 2018, 
which cleans up the public right-of-way to mitigate the pub-
lic health hazards of debris, garbage, and waste adjacent to 
RVs. In the pilot, City of Seattle teams engage individuals 
living in RVs and vehicles to voluntarily move their vehicles 
to allow for cleaning and the removal of garbage and 
inoperable or unsafe vehicles left behind. Navigation Team 
members assist in the Program, helping to store personal 
belongings and offering referrals to services and shelter. 

CHIEF SEATTLE CLUB
Located in Seattle’s historic Pioneer Square district, the 
Chief Seattle Club provides a safe and sacred place to rest, 
revive, and nurture the spirit of urban Native peoples in 
need. It is a 501(c)3 registered organization dedicated to 
physically and spiritually supporting American Indian and 
Alaska Native people. At its center in the Pioneer Square 
district of downtown Seattle, the club provides food, med-
ical support, and housing assistance; the Urban Indian Le-
gal Clinic; a Native art program and gallery; frequent out-
ings to tribes, pow wows, and museums; and much more. 

“WE BELIEVE IN THE POWER OF 
ANCESTRAL WAYS AND PRESERVING 
THEM MEANS FOSTERING A SENSE OF 
COMMUNITY AMONG THOSE WITHOUT 
ONE TO CALL THEIR OWN.”   
QUOTE FROM CHIEF SEATTLE 
CLUB WEBSITE 

38

GOAL 5.  
PREVENTING 
DISPLACEMENT  

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

39

5.1

KEEP LONG-TIME HOME OWNERS IN THEIR HOMES

As with many rapidly growing 
cities, many of Seattle’s long-
time residents are struggling in 
neighborhoods where market rate 
housing is no longer affordable. 

In February 2019, the Mayor signed 
an anti-displacement order13 recog-
nizing the need to create affordable, 
inclusive neighborhoods and direct-
ing City departments to develop 

and implement strategies to further 
affordability—including affordability 
of low- and middle-income housing—
to mitigate residential displacement, 
particularly in neighborhoods with 
communities at high risk of displace-
ment. In addition to efforts around 
Mandatory Housing Affordability and 
Affordable Middle Income Housing, 
it includes initiatives around home 
ownership and tenant protections. 

Additionally, the Office of Housing 
is currently exploring a policy that 
would expand the City’s home repair 
program to provide no-interest 
loans to low-income homeowners 
to improve or increase habitable 
space, and to address critical health, 
safety, and structural issues.

5.2 STAND UP FOR THE RIGHTS OF TENANTS AND 

HELP PREVENT UNJUST EVICTIONS

The City of Seattle, in conjunction 
with changes to the State Res-
idential Landlord-Tenant Act, is 
working to improve the protections 
for tenants facing a potential 
eviction. The changes to state 
law and the City’s harmonization 
efforts include the following: 

 · Extending the amount of 

time tenants have to respond 

to a notice to pay or vacate 
from 3 days to 14 days 

 · Requiring the notice to vacate to be 
translated into the top 10 languag-
es spoken in Washington State 

 ·

Including information regarding 
access to legal or advocacy 
resources and identifying 
which cultural organizations 
can provide assistance in the 
primary language of the tenant 

 · Allowing the court the discretion 
to reinstate tenancy if the tenant 
is able to commit to a payment 
plan for outstanding rent and fees

Finally, we are exploring other 
opportunities to create more 
just, equitable, and fairer laws 
and more informed relationships 
between tenants and landlords.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP40

CORRECTING HISTORIC INEQUITY IN NEIGHBORHOODS 

THROUGH OUR EQUITABLE DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVE (EDI) 

Like many cities in the U.S., Seattle was once tightly seg-
regated due to policies like redlining and racial restrictive 
covenants in the early twentieth century. Recognizing that 
the effects of these polices are still impacting our com-
munities today, Seattle has taken steps to correct these 
historic inequities and ensure all our neighborhoods 
are welcoming, vibrant places for all Seattle residents. 

Our Equitable Development Initiative (EDI) was created to 
make public and private investments in neighborhoods 
that support those most in need and that consider past 
history and current conditions so that future outcomes 
are equitably distributed, both for those currently 
living and working in Seattle as well as new arrivals. 

The Equitable Development Framework guides how 
the City prioritizes its work; shapes its budgets, poli-
cies, programs, and investments; and structures the 
implementation of targeted strategies and equitable 
development projects by using clear objectives for 
reducing disparities and achieving equitable outcomes 
for marginalized populations. The Equitable Development 
Framework supports two equity goals: “Strong Communi-
ties and People” and “Great Places with Equitable Access.” 
Six equity drivers are key to achieving equity objectives:

 · Advance economic opportunity. Promote economic 
opportunities for marginalized populations and en-
hance community cultural anchors. Provide access to 
quality education, training, and living-wage career paths.

 · Prevent residential, commercial, and cultural dis-

placement. Enact policies and programs that allow 
marginalized populations, businesses, and community 
organizations to stay in their neighborhoods.

 · Build on local cultural assets. Respect local community 

character, cultural diversity, and values. Preserve 
and strengthen cultural communities and build 
the capacity of their leaders, organizations, and 
coalitions to have greater self-determination.

 · Promote transportation mobility and connectivity. 

Prioritize investment in effective and affordable trans-
portation that supports transit-dependent communities.

 · Develop healthy and safe neighborhoods. Create 
neighborhoods that enhance community health 
through access to public amenities; access 
to healthy, affordable and culturally relevant 
food; and safe environments for everyone.

 · Enable equitable access to all neighborhoods. 

Leverage private developments to fill gaps in ame-
nities, expand the supply and variety of housing and 
employment choices, and create equitable access 
to neighborhoods with high access to opportunity.

As part of her budget, Mayor Durkan made this 
program permanent and announced an additional 
$5 million in 2019, for a total of $21 million, to fund 
community-based organizations working in Seattle on 
anti-displacement strategies and economic development 
opportunities. In September, the City celebrated the 
first property acquisition by an organization made 
possible through EDI funding (a childcare provider 
serving immigrant families purchased a day care and 
community center). Starting this year, the EDI annual 
monitoring program will track equitable development 
outcomes and heightened risk of residential, com-
mercial and cultural displacement trends in Seattle. 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

41

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

42

REACHING OUR EQUITY GOALS  
From focus groups conducted as part of the Racial 
Equity Toolkit, we learned that while the City offers 
multiple programs through its Office of Housing (OH) 
that support low-income homeowners in staying in 
their homes, many people who are eligible for these 
programs do not know about them. We added addi-
tional resources to the OH budget to contract with 
community-based organizations to share information 
about existing and possible future programs, which 
will help ensure we meet our racial equity goals.

5.3

LEVERAGE OPPORTUNITY ZONE CAPITAL  
TO INVEST IN OUR COMMUNITIES

Opportunity zones, included in 
the federal tax code as part of the 
December 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs 
Act, were enacted to spur economic 
development and job creation in 
underserved communities. We 
are working to ensure that the 
communities that were intended to 
benefit from the opportunity zone 

legislation actually benefit—through 
their development priorities, small 
and medium businesses, and 
workforce opportunities. To this end, 
we are exploring all the tools at the 
City’s disposal, from public land and 
expedited permitting to combining 
this incentive with other tax incen-
tives, to bring community projects 

to fruition. The City has focused on 
these critical areas of unique civic 
innovation and high displacement 
by investing almost $232 million 
in affordable rental and ownership 
housing, and business support in 
these zones over the past decade. 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

43

5.4

MINIMIZE THE IMPACTS OF GENTRIFICATION 
ON OUR COMMUNITIES

Thanks to a significant influx 
of new residents, many of 
Seattle’s neighborhoods are 
changing and expanding to 
accommodate this growing 
population. Many longtime 
Seattle residents are passionate 
about their neighborhoods and 
are deeply concerned about 
gentrification erasing the unique 
aspects of their neighborhoods. 

The City of Seattle recently 
passed a new community pref-

erence policy that would allow a 
housing developer to choose to 
give priority access to a portion 
of housing units in a project to 
applicants who live or work in 
a neighborhood at high risk of 
displacement or who formerly 
resided in a neighborhood that 
has experienced displacement. 
Because giving preference 
to a specific group could be 
considered at odds with federal, 
state, and local fair housing 
laws, OH will approve preference 
policies on a case-by-case basis 

if the housing developer can 
demonstrate that the preference 
policy furthers fair housing, does 
not perpetuate segregation, 
and does not disadvantage a 
protected class. Lotteries run 
by the projects themselves 
would be used to select resi-
dents in accordance with the 
preference policy. Communities 
experiencing displacement have 
long asked for this policy.

AFRICATOWN
The City supported a community led partnership to 
redevelop the Liberty Bank Building, the first black-
owned bank west of the Mississippi, which was 
founded as a community response to redlining and 
disinvestment in Central Seattle. The partnership 
was between Africatown Community Land Trust, 
the Black Community Impact Alliance, Byrd Barr 
Place, and Capitol Hill Housing to create 115 new 
affordable homes, affordable retail space for black-
owned businesses, and a living monument to the 
heritage, legacy, and future of the Central District. 
The Central District has historically been home to 
Seattle’s African-American population, but has faced 
increasing displacement pressure in recent decades.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

44

GOAL 6.  
CREATING A  
CONNECTED AND  
AFFORDABLE 
TRANSPORTATION  
NETWORK 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

45

6.1 CULTIVATE A CULTURE OF TRANSIT 

RIDERSHIP AMONG SEATTLE’S YOUTH

A thriving, vibrant and resilient city is 
one where residents have access to 
reliable, high-quality public transpor-
tation–and where all residents feel 
empowered to use public transit as a 
primary means of transportation. Se-
attle is home to a number of public 
transit options, including the Seattle 

Streetcar, Sound Transit Link Light 
Rail, and King County Metro buses. 

By partnering with Seattle Public 
Schools, King County Metro, 
Seattle colleges, and the Seattle 
Department of Transportation, the 
City of Seattle now provides up to 

15,000 young people with unlimited 
access to public transportation 
through the ORCA Opportunity 
program. Seattle is now the largest 
city in the U.S. to provide free transit 
passes to high school students 
and is ushering in a new generation 
of public transportation riders.

6.2

PROVIDE TRANSIT SERVICES TO MORE SEATTLE 
RESIDENTS THROUGH SMART INVESTMENTS IN THE 
SEATTLE TRANSPORTATION BENEFIT DISTRICT

The Seattle Transportation Benefit 
District (STBD) was established in 
2010 to raise additional revenue that 
helps fund improvements to Seattle’s 
transportation services. Through 
the STBD, Seattle raises about $50 

million annually to improve transit 
availability and access through 2020.

Thanks to changes to the STBD 
made in 2018 under Mayor Durkan, 
14,200 additional Seattle households 

now have access to 10-minute 
or better King County Metro bus 
service. In the past year, the City of 
Seattle also invested in additional 
transit service to provide capacity 
for 4,800 new weekday daily rides 
in Seattle, which is a 5% increase.

6.3

EXPAND OUR REGIONAL PUBLIC TRANSIT SYSTEM

Sound Transit 3 (ST3), which was a 
ballot measure in Seattle’s November 
2016 elections, proposed an expan-
sion of the regional public transit 
system managed by Sound Transit. 
This is the City’s most ambitious 
effort to strategically plan for 

affordable transit-oriented devel-
opment for generations to come. 

The $53.8 billion ST3 plan will expand 
the existing Link light rail system to 
the suburbs of Tacoma, Federal Way, 
Everett, and Issaquah, and to the 

Seattle neighborhoods of Ballard and 
West Seattle. The local portion of the 
measure would be partially funded 
by increases in the sales tax, the mo-
tor vehicle excise tax, and property 
taxes. This expansion will improve 
accessibility, efficiency, and afford-
ability for residents across the region.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP46

6.4

ENCOURAGE BIKE USE BY CONNECTING ALMOST 
200 MILES OF A BIKE LANE NETWORK BY 2024

A bikeable city is one where 
people ride bicycles because it is a 
convenient, fun, safe, and healthy 
choice. It is a city in which people 
of all ages and abilities bicycle for 
any trip purpose. Seattle is already 
regarded as one of the most bikeable 
cities in America. In 2019, Seattle 
was even named America’s “Best 
Bike City” by Bicycling magazine. 

The Seattle Bicycle Master Plan 
(BMP) aspires to encourage and 
accommodate more people to 
ride a bicycle. The BMP provides 
a blueprint to make it easier to 
decide to ride a bicycle because it 
is a comfortable and integral part 

of daily life in Seattle for people 
of all ages and abilities. The BMP 
identifies projects and programs to 
be implemented from 2014 to 2033 
to achieve the vision and meet the 
plan’s goals for safety, ridership, 
equity, connectivity, and livability. The 
Center City Bike Network is a project 
to build a network of protected 
bike lanes connecting downtown 
and the rest of Seattle as our city 
continues to grow. Check out the 
project web page to learn more 
about the Center City Bike Network. 

We have also launched the Seattle 
Free-Floating Bike Share Program, 
which lets anyone borrow an 

electric-assist bike for a quick 
errand, a trip to Link light rail, an 
all-day adventure, and everything in 
between. You pick up the bikeshare 
bike closest to you, ride it to where 
you want to go, and leave the bike for 
the next person to ride. Bike share 
in Seattle is run by three private 
vendors, Jump, Lime, and Lyft. In 
order to operate bikes from any of 
the three vendors, you will need to 
download the company’s app, and 
follow the instructions provided. The 
bike share program partnered with 
local nonprofit Rooted in Rights to 
make a video about how and why 
bike share users should park their 
bikes correctly at the end of a ride. 

6.5

COORDINATE TO MINIMIZE THE IMPACT OF EXTENDED 
PLANNED TRAFFIC DISRUPTIONS IN SEATTLE  

Traffic disruptions due to construc-
tion and major improvements are not 
uncommon in major cities like Seat-
tle. Projects like Boston’s Big Dig and 
the replacement of the eastern span 
of the San Francisco-Oakland Bay 
Bridge are frequently accompanied 
by extended regional traffic impacts.

In Seattle, between 2019 and 2024, 
the City will be changing how 

residents travel to and through down-
town. The opening of the State Route 
99 (SR 99) tunnel, the demolition of 
the Alaskan Way Viaduct, the rebuild-
ing of the Central Waterfront, and 
the extension of Link light rail—all of 
these public and private megaproj-
ects will transform our downtown 
and have extended impacts on traffic. 

During this challenging period, the 
City is working with partners across 
the region to manage congestion, 
limit the impact on commuters and 
businesses, and keep downtown 
open for business through a 
five-strategy approach: monitoring 
our transportation system, investing 
in transit, reducing drive-alone 
trips downtown, managing the 
public right-of-way, and coordinating 
regional communications. 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP47

N

Planned 2024
Bike Network 

W
N
E
V
A
D
R
3

NW 125TH

ST

N
E
V
A
N
E
D
N
I
L

NE 145TH ST

N
E
V
A
N
A
D
R
E
M

I

I

E
N
E
V
A
T
S
1

E
N
E
V
A
H
T
5
1

NW 80TH ST

NW 65TH ST

NW 96TH ST

NW 100TH ST
W
N
E
V
A
H
T
8

W
N
E
V
A
H
T
5
1

W
N
E
V
A
H
T
5
1

W
N
E
V
A
H
T
0
2

W
N
E
V
A
H
T
4
1

L

E

 

W
N
E
V
A
D
R
3

 

W COMMODORE

W

AY

A

R

Y

N 46TH ST

W
E
V
A
D
N
2
2

M
A
G
N
O
L
I
A

B

L

V

D

W

W
E
V
A
H
T
8
2

W
E
V
A
D
N
2
3

 

R
B
D
R
A
L
L
A
B

W
E
V
A
H
T
5
1

W

A

Y

N

W

W BERTONA

ST

W
E
V
A
H
T
0
1

W
E
V
A
H
T
6

E
N
E
V
A
H
T
0
3
E
N
AY
W
NE 115TH
Y
CIT
NE 110TH ST

ST

E
K
A
L

 

 

E
N
Y
A
W
T
L
E
V
E
S
O
O
R

E
N
E
V
A
H
T
0
2

E
N
E
V
A
H
T
5
2

E
N
E
V
A
H
T
7
1

E
N
E
V
A
H
T
0
2

 

E
N
E
V
A
H
T
1
1

 

 

 

E
N
Y
A
W
Y
T
S
R
E
V
N
U

I

I

E
N
D
V
L
B
E
K
A
L
T
N
O
M

E

E
V
A
H
T
4
2

E
E
V
A
D
R
3
2

 

E
V
A
D
R
3
2

E
E
V
A
H
T
9
1

 

E
V
A
H
T
9
1

S
E
V
A
D
R
3
2

S
E
V
A
H
T
0
2

 

E
V
A
H
T
4
1

S
E
V
A
H
T
4
1

S
E
V
A
H
T
7
1

NE 75TH ST

NE 70TH ST

E
N
E
V
A
H
T
0
4

NE 55TH ST

E
N
E
V
A
H
T
7
4

NE 41ST ST

E
E
V
A
D
R
3
4

 

E
V
A
H
T
4
3

S
E
V
A
E
D
S
E
K
A
L

I

S
E
V
A
T
S
1
3

S
E
V
A
H
T
8
3

M

L

K

I

S ORCAS ST

N

G

N 125TH ST
N
E
V
A
N
O
T
Y
A
D

N 115TH ST

N 105TH ST

N

NORTHGATE WAY

E
V
A
T
S
1

E
N

N 90TH ST
N 85TH ST

N 65TH ST

E
V
A
T
S
1

E
N

E
N
E
V
A
A
N
O
T
A
L

E
AVE

E
K
A
L
T
S
A
E

N

N 40TH

ST

N35THST
N34THST

W

E

S

T

L

A

N
E
V
A
A
R
O
R
U
A

K

E

A
V
E

N

AVE

W
E
I
V
R
I
A
F

N
E
V
A
H
T
9

2

N

D

P I N

A

T
E  S
0

B

O

R

E

N

 

A

V

V

E

E

2

N

D

A

V

E

T

S

S
E
V
A
H
T
6

W
E
V
A
D
R
3

W
E
V
A
T
S
1

ROY ST

BROAD ST
WALL ST

B
B
N
S
VI
VI

Y
W

Y
W
N
A
K
S
A
L
A

N
A
K
S
A
L
A

S
E
V
A
T
S
1

S
E
V
A
H
T
4

W
S
E
V
A
H
T
6
1

WEST SEATTLE BR WB

W
S
Y
A
W
E
G
D
R
L
E
D

I

W

E

S

T

M

A

R

G

I

N

A

L

W
A
Y

S
W

S
E
V
A
T
S
1

E

A

6
T
H

A

V

E

S

T

M

S

A

R

2024 Full Build Out of 
Planned Bike Projects and 
Existing Bike Facilities 
(Excluding Sharrows) 
Parks

5

S

9

W

T

H

T

U

A

R

V

N

W
S
E
V
A
H
T
9
4

SW GENESEE ST

W
S
E
V
A
H
T
5
3

SW

W
S
E
V
A
H
T
8
4

Y
A
W
Y
O
R
E
L
T
N
U
A
F

W
S
E
V
A
H
T
5
3

I

W
S
E
V
A
A
N
R
O
F
I
L
A
C

J

R

W

A

Y

S

S

W

I
F

T

A

I

A

V

R

E

P

O

S

R

T

W

A

Y

B

E

S

A

C

O

N

A
V
E

S

B
N
R
B
S
V
A
T
S
1

1

2
N
D
A
V
E

S
W

S

T

A
V
E
S

PLSW

N
O
OLS

GIN

A

L

W

A

Y

S

S
E
V
A
H
T
8

S
E
V
A
H
T
8

SW HOLDEN ST

SW TRENTON ST

SW ROXBURY ST

SW 100TH ST

SW 106TH ST
W
S
E
V
A
H
T
5
3

May 20, 2019

0

0.5

1

2
Miles

S
E
V
A
D
N
2
6

B

E

A

C

O

N

A

V

E

S

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP48

GOAL 7.  
HELPING  
RESIDENTS MEET 
THEIR BASIC NEEDS

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

7.1

REDUCE COSTS FOR SENIORS AND FIXED-INCOME RESIDENTS

49

UDP is available for income-qualified 
residential households. The Utility 
Discount Program helps income 
qualified Seattle City Light customers 
lower their electric bills by 60%.

In February, 2018 Mayor Durkan 
announced a new innovative joint 
pilot program by the Seattle Office 
of Housing and Seattle City Light 
to help senior homeowners stay 
warm while reducing their energy 
bills. Under the pilot program, senior 
homeowners with electric heat 
already receiving help with their utility 
bills will be notified that they can 
now automatically qualify for energy 
efficiency upgrades to their home 
that provide additional utility bill 
savings, freeing up resources to pay 
for other important household needs. 

As part of the pilot, the Office of 
Housing and Seattle City Light 
will notify almost 800 senior 
homeowners who participate in the 
Utility Discount Program about their 
eligibility for energy-saving improve-
ments to their home. The improve-
ments, such as insulation and new 
heating systems, are made available 
through the Office of Housing’s 
HomeWise weatherization program.

Additionally, Seattle’s Utility Discount 
Program (UDP) offers eligible cus-
tomers a 60% discount on their Seat-
tle City Light bill and a 50% discount 
on their Seattle Public Utilities bill. 

7.2

ELIMINATE PUNITIVE 
FINES AT THE SEATTLE 
PUBLIC LIBRARY 

Almost $8 million from the proposed $213 million 
property-tax levy would go toward eliminating Seattle 
Public Library fines for late items. The 7-year, $213 
million property-tax levy would replace the expiring 
7-year, $123 million levy, and would cost a median value 
homeowner approximately $7 per month, or $1.58 per 
month more than the current levy. In addition to elimi-
nating library fines, the levy would extend library hours, 
fund renovations and maintenance, and invest in library 
collections and technology services, among other needs.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP50

7.3

HELP SEATTLE RESIDENTS DISCOVER WHICH DISCOUNT 
PROGRAMS THEY QUALIFY FOR – CENTRALIZED 
RESOURCES & A NEW AFFORDABILITY PORTAL 

In 2018, Seattle launched a new 
website, seattle.gov/affordable14, 
which is a page of centralized 
resources. Seattle residents can 
now access more than 100 free 
and discounted resources and 
benefits that the City provides to 
all eligible Seattle residents. These 
resources and benefits range from 
free Internet hotspots and tax 

preparation advice to the UDP, which 
can save income-qualified residential 
households money on their bills.

In partnership with Expedia Group, 
F5, and Tableau, the City is improving 
this resource page by building a 
new, easier-to-navigate Affordability 
Portal. The Affordability Portal seeks 

to create an online information and 
screening tool to connect individuals 
and families to City of Seattle benefit 
programs and services that can 
lower their cost of living. The portal 
will support both benefit seekers 
and the professional and informal 
navigators, such as caseworkers and 
family members, who support them.

7.4

MAKE AFFORDABLE UNITS IN SEATTLE MORE 
ACCESSIBLE AND EASY TO FIND

Between the decentralized afford-
able housing units and resources 
across the city, it can be hard 
for residents in need to identify 
the housing that is available. 

To rectify this, the City of Seattle 
has partnered with Zillow Group, 

Inc. (Zillow) to build an app to help 
people in need of affordable housing 
find units and connect with landlords 
in one place. Currently being devel-
oped through a partnership with 
Mayor Durkan’s Innovation Advisory 
Council, the tool will live on the 
Zillow platform in perpetuity. Upon 

successful completion of the tool, 
Zillow, whose mission is to empower 
consumers with unparalleled 
data around homes and connect 
them with local professionals, will 
consider scaling it to other cities. 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP51

7.5 ENSURE ALL SEATTLE FAMILIES HAVE ACCESS TO FRESH, 
HEALTHY FOOD OPTIONS REGARDLESS OF INCOME LEVEL

In Seattle, 12% of Seattle adults 
faced food hardship in 2013, up from 
only 6% in 2010. Food hardship af-
fects many communities of color dis-
proportionately. Hispanic adults were 
impacted almost three times more 
(29%) than white or Asian adults 
(10%). Multiracial (20%), black (18%), 
and Native American/Alaska Native 
adults (17%) also experienced food 
hardship at disproportionate rates15. 

Seattle’s Fresh Bucks program helps 
families and individuals stretch 
tight food budgets with two key 
programs: Fresh Bucks Match and 
Fresh Bucks Vouchers. Fresh Bucks 
Match doubles the purchasing power 
for low-income residents who use 
their federal food stamp (Supple-
mental Nutrition Assistance Program 
[SNAP]) benefits to purchase fresh 

fruits and vegetables. Every dollar 
spent at a Fresh Bucks retailer using 
food stamp benefits is matched 
to purchase local produce. Eligible 
and enrolled participants receive 
monthly Fresh Bucks Vouchers. 
Vouchers can be used like cash to 
buy fruits and vegetables at all Fresh 
Bucks retailers. We are committed 
to expanding this program. 

Fresh Bucks can be used at more 
than 60 participating retailers in 
Seattle and King County16, including 
farmers’ markets, farm stands, neigh-
borhood grocers, and all Seattle Safe-
way stores. Fresh Bucks is a solution 
that helps low-income residents 
afford healthy foods, diversifies the 
customer base of farmers’ markets, 
and keeps federal food stamp 
dollars in our regional economy. 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP52

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

53

CHAPTER 3:  
CREATING A CITY 
WHERE EVERYONE  
IS WELCOME

“The Trump administration views immigrants and refugees as a threat to our country. 
He is wrong. Here in Seattle, we have always welcomed people who have faced tre-
mendous hardships around the world. Immigrants and refugees are part of Seattle’s 
heritage, and they will continue to make us the city of the future. The Seattle-King 
County Expanded Legal Defense Network is a critical tool to fight for the rights and 
dignities of our immigrant and refugee neighbors.” — Mayor Jenny A. Durkan

A resilient city is a city that stands up for all of its residents—especially the most vulnerable. Many of the 
challenges that are facing Seattle and other major cities across the globe hit vulnerable populations the 
hardest. We know that income inequality, gaps in education, and the environmental impacts of man-made 
climate change have an outsized impact on low-income residents, communities of color, and immigrant and 
refugee communities. True resilience means understanding and meeting these challenges head on, and enacting 
policies that mitigate these historic injustices and help to make our city a more equitable place for all.

With a federal administration that is targeting vulnerable populations like lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and 
queer/questioning (LGBTQ+) people and immigrant and refugee communities across the country, progressive 
cities like Seattle have had to step up to increase protections against unjust incursions from some federal agencies 
like U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). Protecting all of our residents is critical to ensuring that 
our city can survive both long-term stresses and acute shocks while keeping all of our communities safe.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

54

GOAL 8.  
CORRECTING  
HISTORIC INJUSTICES 
IN THE CRIMINAL  
JUSTICE SYSTEM

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

155

8.1

CREATE A FUND TO HELP FORMERLY 
INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS START OVER 

Reentry programs offer formerly 
incarcerated individuals a chance 
to start over by providing bridge 
housing, skill-building opportunities, 
and addiction recovery services. 
Seattle’s Fair Chance Employment 
Ordinance and Washington State’s 
successful Ban the Box initiative 
means that many formerly incarcer-
ated individuals are not automatically 
disqualified from employment and 

housing due to a prior conviction his-
tory—but there is always more to do 
to help address the specific reentry 
needs of our diverse communities.

Mayor Durkan committed $250,000 
of one-time funding in 2019 
for reentry investments to pilot 
new and innovative strategies to 
facilitate successful reentry. For 
example, a future pilot could focus 

on preventing the discharge of 
people from jail into homelessness 
or addressing the specific reentry 
needs of Native Americans. Specific 
indigenous healing practices include 
cultural, spiritual, and ceremonial 
activities, such as drumming 
circles and Inipi ceremonies (sweat 
lodges), that focus on healing, 
building connection and trust, and 
providing a sense of community. 

8.2

REMOVE OUTSTANDING NON-VIOLENT WARRANTS 
TO FREE PEOPLE FROM THE STIGMA AND 
FINANCIAL BURDENS OF MINOR OFFENSES

In November 2018, the Seattle City 
Attorney’s Office filed a motion ask-
ing a judge to quash more than 200 
outstanding warrants for non-violent, 
non-felony offenses. Felonies are 
handled by the King County Superior 
Court. While most of the warrants 

are for people who were convicted 
but failed to show up to court for 
subsequent hearings, according to 
the City, others are for people who 
did not appear in court before a 
judgment could be reached (known 
as pre-dispositional warrants).

While the City Attorney’s Office 
works with the municipal court on 
a quarterly basis for pre-disposi-
tional warrants not cleared within 7 
years, this request was the first to 
consider post-conviction warrants. 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP56

SQUAREPEG 
CONSTRUCTION 

Brady and Amy King started Square Peg Con-
struction in 2014 and shortly after found a labor 
shortage that many other builders in Seattle were 
facing as well. Around this time, they met six 
men who became the first employees at Square 
Peg. These men were all skilled craftsmen, hard 
workers, and trustworthy; they all also happened 
to have a history of criminal justice involvement, 
addiction recovery, or homelessness. Listening to 
the stories of the barriers these men faced, the 
Kings learned that a person’s past should not define 
who they are capable of becoming and that a good, 
steady job is critically important when someone 
is reintegrating into society. Square Peg provides 
much more than a job. The company strives to 
give purpose and a family environment in which 
individuals can find love and accountability. 

8.3

ADDRESS THE NEGATIVE IMPACT OF THE FAILED 
WAR ON DRUGS ON COMMUNITIES OF COLOR

For too many who call Seattle home, 
a misdemeanor marijuana conviction 
or charge has historically created 
barriers to opportunity—to good jobs, 
housing, loans, and education. It 
created a permanent criminal record 
that traveled with someone their 
whole life. We also know that these 

charges and convictions dispropor-
tionately target communities of color.

The City of Seattle no longer pros-
ecutes misdemeanor marijuana 
possessions, and has not done so 
since 2010. In February 2018, Seattle 
Mayor Jenny Durkan and City Attor-

ney Pete Holmes moved to vacate 
convictions for misdemeanor mari-
juana possession prosecuted by the 
City before legalization in 2012. Later 
in 2018, the Seattle Municipal Court 
agreed to vacate these convictions. 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP57

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

58

GOAL 9.  
PROTECTING OUR 
MOST VULNERABLE 
COMMUNITIES

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

59

9.1 PROTECT SEATTLE FAMILIES BY MAKING IT HARDER FOR 
UNSECURED FIREARMS TO END UP IN THE WRONG HANDS

Across the country, nearly 1,300 
children die and 5,790 are treated 
for gunshot wounds each year. In 
2015, an estimated 150,000 adults 
in King County reported keeping 
a firearm unlocked in their homes. 
In Seattle, 250 stolen guns were 
reported from burglaries and car 
prowls in 2017 according to the 
Seattle Police Department. Safe 
storage is a commonsense, easy 
way to save lives and keep firearms 
from falling into the wrong hands.

In February 2019, Seattle passed a 
Safe Storage law that will reduce 
gun violence and help protect 
Seattle communities by requiring 
the responsible storage of firearms 
unless carried by or under the 
control of an owner or lawfully 
authorized user. If a minor, at-risk 
person, or person not legally allowed 
to possess a firearm accesses a 
gun that was not safely stored, the 
owner could face a fine of up to 
$1,000. If the person accesses the 

gun and uses it in connection with 
a crime or to kill or injure someone, 
the owner could face a fine of up to 
$10,000. If the gun is used in a mass 
shooting, courts would have the 
ability to levy more than one $10,000 
fine against the gun owner. Courts 
could consider restitution in lieu of 
fines. Supporters of the legislation 
said it is meant to reduce accidental 
gun injuries, thefts, and suicides.

9.2

WORK TO DEVELOP AN EARTHQUAKE EARLY WARNING 
SYSTEM AND EXPLORE OPPORTUNITIES TO RETROFIT 
UNREINFORCED MASONRY BUILDINGS

Seattle has an estimated 1,164 Unre-
inforced Masonry Buildings (URMs) 
throughout the city and they have 
long been identified as a significant 
threat to public safety in the event of 
an earthquake. The City of Seattle’s 
Department of Construction and 
Inspections (SDCI) and Office of 
Emergency Management (OEM) 
have been involved in a multi-year 
effort to explore policy options for 
retrofitting these buildings, while 
minimizing the financial burden to 
property owners and addressing 
issues of displacement. Retrofitting 
of public buildings is underway. 
Using a local public safety levy, we 
seismically strengthened all Fire 
Stations, and some water reservoirs.  
In addition, also using grant funding, 
we seismically upgraded Jefferson 

and Queen Anne Community centers, 
two Pioneer Square area ways, the 
old Armory, and installed natural 
gas shut-off valves on 35 critical 
City facilities. SDOT has also been 
upgrading bridges and overpasses 
through its capital budget.

We are also working on an Earth-
quake Early Warning project that 
will build software to automatically 
warn infrastructure control systems 
and personnel about earthquakes 
before the ground starts shaking. 
Trains could be automatically slowed 
or elevators could return to the 
ground floor, for example. Since 
earthquakes can only be detected 
after they initiate, and even with the 
best technology we will probably only 
have seconds of warning, automated 

action is critical. The project will 
integrate pre-developed partner 
components, such as the United 
States Geological Survey’s (USGS) 
ShakeAlert system, which detects 
and models earthquakes; middleware 
that will distribute warning to end-
point receivers; and the end-point 
receivers that can securely convey 
warnings to infrastructure control 
systems. While there is still much to 
learn about how ShakeAlert will work 
with warning delivery components 
and infrastructure systems, this beta 
project will test the effectiveness 
of the earthquake sensor network 
and notification platform. This 
beta project will help inform a 
successful launch to the general 
public in the Pacific Northwest.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP60

9.3

UPHOLD LASTING REFORM AT THE 
SEATTLE POLICE DEPARTMENT

Signed by Mayor Durkan as the 
then-United States Attorney for the 
Western District of Washington, the 
consent decree required the Seattle 
Police Department to enact signif-
icant reforms, including new use-
of-force policies and trainings that 
emphasize deescalation, a new ap-

proach to how officers interact with 
people experiencing a mental crisis, 
and new supervision and oversight 
with community involvement. As a 
result, there has been a decrease 
in uses of force overall—including 
a significant reduction of the most 
serious uses of force—and a signif-

icant decline in force used against 
people in crisis. The City of Seattle 
will continue working to sustain its 2 
years of full and effective compliance 
with the consent decree to build 
lasting reform and accountability.

TO DATE, THE IMMIGRANT LEGAL  
DEFENSE FUND HAS GIVEN OVER $4.7 
MILLION TO HELP LOCAL ORGANIZATIONS 
PROTECT OUR IMMIGRANT AND 
REFUGEE COMMUNITIES:

KIDS IN NEED OF DEFENSE: $860,000

NORTHWEST IMMIGRANT RIGHTS PROJECT 
(NWIRP) AND COLLECTIVA LEGAL DEL PUEBLO 
JOINT APPLICATION: $2,665,000

WEST AFRICAN COMMUNITY 
COUNCIL (WACC): $748,000

ASIAN COUNSELING AND REFERRAL SERVICES 
– LEGAL DEFENSE TEAM: $493,333
ENTRE HERMANOS: $680,000TS INP

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

9.4

PROTECT SEATTLE’S IMMIGRANT & REFUGEE COMMUNITY 
FROM UNCONSTITUTIONAL FEDERAL POLICIES

61

laws. These protocols will work in 
conjunction with the existing City 
ordinance and policy, which states 
that City employees are prohibited 
from asking about immigration 
status, that City employees will serve 
all residents, and that City services 
will be accessible to all residents, 
regardless of immigration status. 

The changing direction of the 
U.S. Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement’s (ICE) focus in recent 
years distracts and drains resources 
from real public safety threats and 
has the explicit outcome of causing 
widespread fear and uncertainty for 
all immigrants on a daily basis. As a 
resilient city, Seattle is committed to 
standing with its immigrant and ref-
ugee communities, and to protecting 
them from attempts to undermine 
their sense of safety and security.

On May 29, 2019, the Seattle Mayor 
and the King County Executive 
announced the grantees of the 
Expanded Seattle-King County Immi-
grant Legal Defense Network (ELDN). 
ELDN grants $5.6 million to commu-

nity-based organizations working to 
provide legal services to immigrants 
and refugees at risk of deportation. 
In 2017, Seattle and King County 
established the first Legal Defense 
Network, a partnership to respond 
to increases in both anti-immigrant 
rhetoric and immigration enforce-
ment under the Trump administration.

To further Seattle as a Welcoming 
City for immigrant and refugee resi-
dents and workers, City department 
directors must refer all requests from 
ICE authorities, including requests 
for access to certain private work 
areas, to the Mayor’s Office of Legal 
Counsel. The directive also ensures 
that all staff members understand 
and comply with our Welcoming City 

9.5

PROVIDE PERMANENT RESIDENTS IN SEATTLE WITH 
THE TOOLS THEY NEED TO BECOME CITIZENS

Today’s immigrants are tomorrow’s 
American citizens who should 
have the chance to contribute to 
the economic, cultural, and civic 
life of Seattle—and our nation

The New Citizen Campaign of the 
Office of Immigrant and Refugee 
Affairs is an effort to help the tens 
of thousands of legal permanent 
residents (LPRs) in Seattle to 
become U.S. citizens. This campaign 
uses citizenship clinics, outreach and 

education, citizenship curriculum and 
legal assistance, and engagement 
with local and national partners to 
achieve our goal of naturalizing the 
more than 75,000 LPRs living in 
the Seattle and King County area.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP62

9.6 ENSURE ALL OF SEATTLE’S RESIDENTS ARE COUNTED

We know that the U.S. Census is 
critically important to the health and 
well-being of many of our communi-
ties. The Census allocates billions of 
dollars in federal aid to Washington 
State each year. Because of the 
important role that the Census plays 
in supporting our communities 
and shaping our city for years to 

come, Mayor Durkan created the 
Seattle Census Task Force in 2018. 

This task force advises the Mayor on 
policy and outreach to historically 
undercounted communities and 
will help implement 2020 Census 
preparations. In light of attempts by 
the Federal Government to influence 
the Census turnout, Seattle and 

King County partnered to create a 
$1 million Regional Census Fund to 
ensure a complete, informed, and 
safe count. The Seattle Census 
Task Force is working to ensure 
our residents have the resources 
and information they deserve to 
participate in the 2020 Census.

9.7

PREPARE OUR MOST VULNERABLE RESIDENTS 
FOR NEW AND EMERGING PUBLIC HEALTH 
CONCERNS DUE TO GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE

In an effort to prepare the commu-
nity—especially children, the elderly, 
those with respiratory conditions, 
and those experiencing home-
lessness—for the rising impact of 
wildfire smoke, the City is partnering 
with other agencies to coordinate 
our response. June 19, 2019, was 
the Regional Public Information 
Campaign for Smoke-Ready Com-
munities Day in the Puget Sound, 
which aimed to inform residents 
on what they can do to prepare for 
our impending smoke season. 

Our coordinated efforts include up-
grading the heating, ventilation, and 
air conditioning (HVAC) systems at 
the International District Community 
Center, Rainier Beach Community 
Center, the Seattle Center Armory, 
the Exhibition Hall, and the Fisher 
Pavilion. We are adding MERV 11 
filters, sealing access doors on out-
door HVAC units to prevent air leaks, 
providing stand-alone air scrubbers 
in childcare rooms, and installing 
air curtains to prevent smoke from 
entering the building as people come 
and go. We are also building a GIS 
Map for Red Quality Days to ensure 

citizens can easily find out where to 
go to avoid the unsafe air. Internally, 
the City is reviewing our compensa-
tion policies during “inclement weath-
er” and adding periods of poor air 
quality to the definition, and writing 
City Policy for Voluntary Respirator 
Use for employees who primarily 
work outdoors. With unsafe air days 
included in the “inclement weather” 
definition, City staff can take similar 
measures as in a snowstorm—acti-
vate alternative work arrangements 
or take vacation if needed to protect 
their health or care for their children.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP63

s
d
o
o
h
r
o
b
h
g
e
N

i

 
f
o
 
t
n
e
m

 

t
r
a
p
e
D
e
l
t
t
a
e
S

 
:
t
i
d
e
r
C

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP64

GOAL 10.  
STANDING UP FOR  
ALL OF SEATTLE’S 
WORKERS

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

65

10.1

PROTECT FAMILY-WAGE JOBS IN THE INDUSTRIAL SECTOR 

With Seattle’s growing population 
and the increasing housing demand, 
there is ever-increasing market pres-
sure to convert industrial lands to 
other land uses, such as multi-family 
residential and commercial devel-
opments. Industrial lands are a 
backbone to support family-wage 
jobs and are necessary to build 
an inclusive economy in Seattle. 

Without question, housing and com-
mercial developments are necessary 
and have greatly improved many 
areas of our city, meeting the needs 
of a growing city, creating vibrant 
neighborhoods and supporting 
thousands of new jobs. Land zoned 
for industrial use supports many 
good family-wage jobs. Seattle’s 
most recent study on industrial lands 
found 106,000 current industrial 
jobs in Seattle, representing 18% of 

total employment in the city. More 
than 67% of Seattle’s industrial jobs 
require only a high school diploma 
or no formal education credential. 
In maritime industry clusters like 
fishing or water transportation, 
average earnings per worker are 
more than $100,000 a year. We are 
committed to ensuring that the 
diverse and resilient economic base 
Seattle is built on is maintained.

10.2

ESTABLISH LABOR STANDARDS FOR 
WORKERS AT HIGH RISK OF ABUSE

In 2015, Seattle became one of the 
first cities in the nation to establish 
a $15 minimum wage to help 
address the increased cost of living. 
While this was an enormous step 
forward for many low-wage workers 
in Seattle, this ordinance did not 
address certain classes of workers 
that are at a high risk for abuse. Key 
among these groups are domestic 
workers and hotel workers, and both 
of these groups have long been 
subjected to unfair, unregulated, and 
often unsafe working conditions.

In order to address these potential 
abuses, Seattle passed the Domestic 
Workers Bill of Rights in 2018, which 
mandates that domestic workers 
be paid the Seattle minimum wage, 
establishes uninterrupted meal 
and rest periods, and provides 
1 day (24 hours) off in a 7-day 
period for workers who reside 
where they are employed.17 

Similarly, due to the unique nature 
of hotel work, hotel workers are sub-
jected to a higher risk of harassment 
and violence on the job. In June 2019, 

the City proposed new legislation to 
provide basic safeguards to protect 
hotel employees from assault and in-
jury on the job, improve their access 
to affordable health care, and provide 
them with a minimum standard 
of job security. This measure also 
includes strong enforcement mech-
anisms to ensure that hotel owners 
and operators comply with the law.18 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP66

10.3

ADDRESS WORKPLACE VIOLATIONS EFFECTIVELY

The Office of Labor Standards (OLS) 
was established on April 1, 2015, as 
part of Seattle’s $15 minimum wage 
ordinance. It was created to assist 
with the citywide implementation of 
the new $15 minimum wage and to 
provide a central location for Seattle 
workers to file workplace violations 
related to unfair practices such as 

tip withholding and time theft or 
being asked to work without breaks. 

Since 2015, OLS has been investigat-
ing complaints against employers, 
leading to a substantial backlog at 
the beginning of 2018. Recognizing 
that many low-wage workers could 
not wait indefinitely for their claims 
to close, Seattle prioritized clearing 

out this backlog. Without sacrificing 
effectiveness, OLS closed many of 
these older investigations, assessing 
a total of $2,130,619 for the benefit 
of 2,521 workers. By the end of 2018, 
OLS had reduced this backlog by 
83%, closed 193 investigations, and 
opened 114 new investigations.

10.4

ENSURE THAT LOW WAGE WORKERS HAVE 
ACCESS TO WORKER PROTECTIONS

Based on current outreach to 
affected platform economy workers 
to better understand the impacts 
of their work, the City’s Office of 

Labor Standards will be exploring 
the possibility of a pilot initiative with 
The Rockefeller Foundation to shape 

a portable benefits mechanism 
for workers in the gig economy.  

PUGET SOUND SAGE

Puget Sound Sage builds thriving, resilient communities 
rooted in good jobs, affordable housing, accessible 
transit, and a healthy environment. Puget Sound Sage is 
on the forefront of a renewed movement for economic 
justice in our region. They work to reduce inequality by 
advancing policy, such as a minimum wage, paid sick 
leave, access to full-time jobs, enforcement of good 
job standards, and placement of people with barriers 
to employment in public worker construction jobs. 
Some of their program accomplishments include:

 · Passing the $15 minimum wage and Paid 
Sick and Safe Time ordinances in Seattle. 

 · Convening the Interfaith Economic Justice 

Coalition—interfaith leaders from the region—as 
a means of uplifting worker issues for the public, 
organizing support in faith communities, and 
helping build power in worker organizing.

 ·

In collaboration with partners, winning the City 
of Seattle’s Priority Hire Ordinance for local 
workers to enter green construction careers.

CREATE A CREATE 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP67

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

68

y
h
p
a
r
g
o
t
o
h
P
 
y
d
w
o
G
e
t
a
N

 

 
:
t
i
d
e
r
C

GOAL 11.  
SERVING AS A  
MODEL EMPLOYER BY  
DRIVING EQUITABLE 
OUTCOMES

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

69

11.1 CREATE A SAFE AND WELCOMING WORKPLACE 

FOR ALL CITY OF SEATTLE EMPLOYEES

The City of Seattle employs almost 
12,000 workers. This makes it one 
of the largest employers in the 
city, and gives us an opportunity to 
serve as a good example for other 
large employers in Seattle. Similarly, 
any challenges that City employ-
ees face in the workplace have 
significant impacts on resilience.

Following claims of harassment and 
hostile working conditions in City 

departments, Mayor Durkan passed 
an executive order implementing 
a number of changes that will 
reform and update how the City 
addresses allegations of harassment, 
discrimination, and other forms of 
misconduct.19 This includes the 
creation of an Anti-Harassment 
Interdepartmental Team to review 
the City’s harassment and discrim-
ination policies and the creation of 
an Office of the Employee Ombud, 
which will provide independent, 

impartial, and informal support to 
individual employees experiencing 
harassment or discrimination. 

Both of these bodies provide 
recommendations to the Mayor and 
City Council on citywide policies and 
procedures related to harassment, 
discrimination, and creation of an 
inclusive workplace environment.

11.2

GENERATE OPPORTUNITIES FOR WORKERS 
IN UNDERREPRESENTED GROUPS

The City promotes access to con-
struction careers for women, people 
of color, and others who are histor-
ically underrepresented in this field. 
In 2015, the City created a Priority 
Hire Program for City public works 
construction projects of $5 million or 
more. Using City-funded construction 

projects, the Priority Hire Program 
will prioritize the hiring of residents 
who live in economically distressed 
areas, particularly in Seattle and King 
County. In addition, City projects will 
have apprentice utilization require-
ments20 and women and people of 
color aspirational goals. For CWA 

(community workforce agreements) 
projects, 10% of the hours were 
performed by women and 28% of 
the hours were performed by people 
of color for the November 2013 
through December 2018 time frame.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP70

11.3

PROMOTE UTILIZATION OF WOMEN- AND MINORITY-OWNED 
BUSINESS ENTERPRISES (WMBE) IN SEATTLE PROCUREMENTS  

The City of Seattle actively supports 
utilization of women- and minori-
ty-owned business enterprises 
(WMBE) on City contracts as both 
primes and subcontractors. Each 
City department establishes plans 
and annual voluntary goals for 
WMBE inclusion in consulting and 
purchasing contracts. WMBE firms 
need not be state certified to meet 
the City’s WMBE definition. The 
City defines WMBE firms as at 

least 51% owned by women and/
or a minority. To be recognized as a 
WMBE, firms must register on the 
City’s Online Business Directory.21  
Federally funded transportation 
projects require a Disadvantaged 
Business Enterprise (DBE) program; 
for that program, firms must be 
certified by the Washington State 
Office of Minority and Women 
Business Enterprises (OMWBE).22 

In 2018, 14% of the City’s purchas-
ing dollars went to WMBE firms, 
while 22% of the City’s consulting 
dollars went to WMBE firms. For 
2019, the City has set the highest 
citywide WMBE aspirational goals 
for consultant and purchasing 
procurements: 17% for WMBE 
purchasing and 24% for WMBE 
consultants. Moreover, the Mayor 
challenged departments to a city-
wide prompt payment metric of 95%. 

11.4

ENSURE THAT THE CITY OF SEATTLE’S HUMAN 
RESOURCES POLICIES SERVE OUR WORKERS

Part of serving as a model employer 
is ensuring that our policies are sup-
porting our workers and providing 
them opportunities to deal with all of 
life’s many uncertainties. In addition 
to providing high-quality benefits, 
compensation, and leave packages, 
we must continually examine the 
City of Seattle’s policies to ensure 
that they are working as intended.

This is one example. Due to a 
loophole in City leave policies, City 
employees who lost a child were not 
eligible for paid family-care leave, 
which specifically requires that 
the City employee care for another 
family member. In addition, City 
employees who lost a child were not 
eligible for paid parental leave, which 
is exclusively for the purpose of 
bonding with a new child. Therefore, 
a City employee was forced to 
use paid sick or vacation time, as 

available, to grieve the loss of their 
child and manage their affairs. If 
the City employee did not have any 
paid sick or vacation time available, 
they had to choose between either 
coming to work, requesting donated 
sick leave, or staying home without 
pay. On June 17, 2019, Mayor Durkan 
signed legislation to expand the 
City of Seattle’s paid family-care 
leave to include access for city 
employees who lose a child.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP71

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

72

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

73

CHAPTER 4:  
FOSTERING  
GENERATIONAL  
INVESTMENTS

As our city grows, Seattle has the chance to make generational investments in major public works projects that will 
literally change the face of our city and increase our economic resilience—including a greatly expanded light rail 
network, a brand new 20-acre waterfront park, and an updated Washington Convention Center. As we make these 
investments, we will continue to prioritize the stewardship of our environment, just as we have by pioneering the nation’s 
first carbon-neutral electric utility and preserving safe drinking water by managing two large, regional watersheds.

Without leadership from the Federal Government, cities like Seattle must take bold action to address climate change and 
reduce emissions at the municipal level. In April 2018, Mayor Durkan announced her Climate Action Strategy, which in-
cludes 12 actions that will enable Seattle to reach its climate goals, including carbon neutrality by 2050. As part of Seattle’s 
commitment to the Paris Climate Agreement, Mayor Durkan has undertaken bold new climate efforts to reduce carbon 
pollution from our transportation and building sectors and make Seattle a national leader in fighting climate change. These 
actions are designed to move beyond incremental change and fundamentally reshape our city’s carbon footprint for a 
fossil-fuel-free future. To meet this goal, our Climate Action Plan has a goal of reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
in the residential sector by 20% by 2030 and a goal of reducing passenger transportation emissions by 82% by 2030.

“This year, we will move ahead on some incredible public and private projects that 
will change the face of this city. These projects – and how we build them – must be 
guided by our vision and shared value of equity and community. Just look at our water-
front - we are reconnecting our city with our heart: the Puget Sound. We are opening 
up the space we need to create a 20 acre park right at our front porch for everybody 
who calls Seattle home. It is going to be magnificent.” — Mayor Jenny A. Durkan

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

74

GOAL 12.  
REIMAGINING AND  
ENHANCING OUR 
CIVIC TREASURES

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

75

12.1

CREATE A NEW WATERFRONT FOR ALL 

Built during the 1950s, Seattle’s 
double-decker Alaskan Way Viaduct 
(Viaduct) has stretched across our 
downtown waterfront for more than 
60 years. Long a fixture of the Seattle 
skyline, the Viaduct was damaged in 
the 6.8-magnitude Nisqually quake 
in 2001. Although the structure 
was repaired and stabilized in the 
following years, in 2009 Washington 
State, King County, the City of Seattle, 
and the Port of Seattle decided to 
replace the Viaduct with a deep-bore 
tunnel through downtown Seattle. 

The demolition of the Viaduct has 
given Seattle a chance to reimagine 
the waterfront as a brand-new 
“waterfront for all.” Seattle’s new 
waterfront will include 20 acres 

of public space and an elevated 
pathway reconnecting Pike Place 
Market and downtown to the water-
front. It will support safe and efficient 
travel for pedestrians, bicyclists, 
vehicles, and freight while providing 
much-needed green space to 
support Seattle’s continued growth. 

Construction began in 2019 with 
funding from the philanthropic 
community, the City of Seattle, 
and Washington State. Of the 
approximately $711 million needed 
to construct the new waterfront, 
less than one-third will come from 
City sources. The philanthropic 
community has committed $110 
million, while the City will invest $248 
million, which will include funding 

from the Park Improvement District. 
Commercial and residential property 
owners who stand to benefit most 
directly from the waterfront improve-
ments will contribute $160 million as 
part of a Local Improvement District. 

This historic effort has also 
established a partnership between 
Seattle Parks and Recreation and 
the nonprofit Friends of Waterfront 
Seattle to ensure that new waterfront 
park spaces are safe and well 
maintained. In addition, the State 
has committed $193 million for 
the new Alaskan Way Viaduct to 
maintain a critical freight and port 
connection along the waterfront.

12.2

CULTIVATE A NEW GENERATION OF SPORTS FANS IN SEATTLE

Seattle is already well-known for its 
incredible, competitive sports teams. 
Seattle has several nationally re-
nowned teams, including the Sound-
ers FC, the Mariners, the Seahawks, 
the Seattle Storm, Seattle Reign FC, 
and our brand new U.S. Major League 
Rugby team, the Seattle Seawolves. 

With so many amazing teams, it’s 
clear why sports are a vital part of 
Seattle’s civic fabric. And we are 
striving to expand our sports scene 
even further. The renovation of the 
Arena at Seattle Center (previously 
known as the Key Arena) will 
not only provide our city with yet 
another world-class music and arts 

venue that will generate jobs and 
economic activity, but it will allow 
Seattle to bring professional hockey 
back to our city for the first time 
in 100 years. A $75 million training 
center in Northgate, a shopping area 
in the north of the city, will have 
three ice sheets to provide more 
opportunities for people to skate.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP76

12.3

ENCOURAGE A THRIVING, CIVICALLY ENGAGED 
ARTS COMMUNITY IN SEATTLE

The City of Seattle strives to create 
spaces that encourage and support 
the community of artists who 
call Seattle home. To recognize 
the contributions of the mosaic 
of communities in Southeast Se-
attle, in 2018 Columbia City and 
Hillman City became Seattle’s 
fourth Arts & Cultural District. 

The mission of this Arts & Cultural 
District is to celebrate and enhance 
the authentic and culturally diverse 
soul of the Columbia City and 

Hillman City neighborhoods through 
identification with, and advancement 
of, arts and culture and celebration 
of the historic role the arts have 
played in these communities. The 
Seattle Asian Art Museum is a 
world-class cultural resource and 
park amenity for residents and 
visitors. Its renovation and expansion 
preserved the 1933 historic building 
and its Art Deco façade. In 2019, 
the City opened a renovated King 
Street Station to create a dynamic 
new hub for the presentation and 

enjoyment of arts and culture, 
increasing opportunities for people 
of color and other underrepresented 
populations in Seattle to generate 
and present their work. ARTS at King 
Street Station incorporates a new 
7,500-square-foot cultural space plus 
meeting and presentation areas that 
are available to the general public; 
a studio for an artist-in-residence; 
and offices for staff of the Seattle 
Office of Arts & Culture (ARTS). 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP12.4

INVEST IN OUR REGIONAL TRANSIT SYSTEM AND 
CREATING MORE TRANSIT-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT

77

Our audacious expansion of the regional 
public transit system will improve accessibility, 
efficiency and affordability for residents across 
the region for generations to come. This is our 
effort to plan strategically for affordable, regional 
transit-oriented development. The $53.8 billion 
Sound Transit 3 plan will expand the existing 
Link light rail system to the suburbs of Tacoma, 
Federal Way, Everett, and Issaquah as well as to 
the Seattle neighborhoods of Ballard and West 
Seattle. The local portion of the measure would 
be partially funded by increases in the sales 
tax, motor vehicle excise tax, and property tax.

t
i
s
n
a
r
T
d
n
u
o
S

 

 
:
t
i
d
e
r
C

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

78

GOAL 13.  
MEETING THE  
NEEDS OF OUR  
GROWING CITY

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

79

13.1

FIND NEW OPPORTUNITIES TO EXPAND AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
OPTIONS AND INCREASE DENSITY IN NEW CONSTRUCTION 

One of Seattle’s key challenges 
to expanding the city’s housing 
stock is our natural environment 
and geography. Steep hills, large 
lakes, and shipping channels 
limit our city’s buildable land. As 
a result, increasing density in new 
construction has become more and 

more vital to creating space for our 
rapidly growing population. One of 
the ways that Seattle is addressing 
this challenge is through Mandatory 
Housing Affordability (MHA). 

MHA ensures that new commercial 
and multifamily residential develop-

ment contributes to affordable hous-
ing. MHA will provide an estimated 
6,000 new rent-restricted homes for 
low-income people. The affordable 
housing requirements took effect 
in March 2019, when the Seattle 
City Council adopted new zoning 
that adds development capacity. 

13.2

PROVIDE FOR THE HEALTH AND SAFETY 
OF ALL SEATTLE RESIDENTS

Seattle’s growing population brings 
with it increased health and safety 
challenges. To help address this, 
Seattle has prioritized the hiring of 
public safety personnel, including 
60 new firefighters for the Seattle 
Fire Department in 2019 and 10 new 
Seattle Police Department officers 
for 2019, with an additional 30 for 
2020. New hires will help address 
the increased call volume and foster 
a community-based policing model 
to help build greater trust between 
the police and the community. 
The Seattle Fire Department also 

recently rolled out a first-of-its 
kind partnership with Seattle City 
Light to combat dangerous fires 
in underground electrical vaults. 

In recent years, Seattle’s first 
responders have responded to a 
record number of non-emergency 
calls—especially in our downtown 
core. To help address this increase in 
non-emergency calls, Seattle re-
cently launched the Health One pilot 
program, a team of specially trained 
firefighters and civilians who will help 
people with non-emergency 911 re-

quests for issues such as substance 
abuse, non-life-threatening medical 
concerns, and access to services. 
This pilot program allows us to serve 
our most vulnerable residents while 
also saving taxpayer dollars and 
freeing up our public safety officers 
to respond to other critical needs 
(e.g., structure fires and vehicle 
collisions). The program is scheduled 
to go into service around October 
1, 2019. Rollout of the pilot is on 
track to meet that anticipated date. 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP80

13.3 ENHANCE SEATTLE’S WALKABILITY AND PROTECTING 

PEDESTRIANS THROUGHOUT OUR CITY

Walkability and accessibility are at 
the core of a strong and healthy 
community. Among large U.S. cities, 
Seattle is one of the safest cities 
for pedestrians. Because even one 
crash is one too many, the City is 
committed to improving pedestrian 
safety through the Pedestrian 

Master Plan (PMP) and delivery of 
the City’s Vision Zero program. 

Investing in safe and connected 
pedestrian facilities helps to ensure 
a high quality of life for people who 
live and work in Seattle, and for 

visitors to our city. People who live 
in accessible, pedestrian-friendly 
areas are more likely to be familiar 
with their neighborhoods and to have 
richer social connections to their 
community. This is true for all Seattle 
residents, from young children to 
older adults and everyone in between.

13.4

MAINTAIN HIGH LEVELS OF EXCELLENCE AND EFFICIENCY 
FOR CUSTOMER SERVICE AT THE CITY OF SEATTLE

The City of Seattle plays a critical 
role in its residents’ lives by 
connecting residents to services, 
helping them apply for permits 
and licenses, answering questions 
and addressing concerns every 
day that help make the lives of all 
Seattleites a little easier. It is critical 

that the City respond quickly and 
efficiently to resident requests.

Shortly after taking office, Mayor 
Durkan learned that Seattle City 
Light had a customer service 
backlog—including requests for 
reforms, moves, and corrections 
or adjustments—that reached a 

peak of 74,157. After direction from 
the Mayor to engage in a focused 
effort to address the backlog, it was 
cleared by March 23, 2018. The City 
continues to look for efficiencies in 
performance across departments 
in order to be responsive to citizens’ 
needs and ensure that the delivery of 
basic services functions smoothly. 

13.5

PROTECT AND PRESERVE SEATTLE’S UNIQUE 
MARITIME AND INDUSTRIAL LANDS

Our maritime, manufacturing, and 
industrial activities contribute 
significantly to the city’s identity. 
They are part of what makes 
Seattle, “Seattle.” The Coast Salish 
people have lived in this region for 
thousands of years, fishing in waters 
that, to this day, provide both jobs 
and food for the people of Seattle. 

Our success as a city is deeply tied 
to the industries that prosper here. 
From fishing, ship building, lumber 
mills, and airplane manufacturing 
to the small- and medium-scale 
manufacturers of machine parts, 
apparel, and recreational goods 
sold around the world, the industrial 
activities supported by the city’s 
industrial lands have long benefitted 
Seattle by providing family-wage jobs 

and promoting economic diversity. 
Today, some of our most innovative 
manufacturers are combining 
information technology, artistic 
design, and sustainable manufactur-
ing practices to drive us forward. We 
are committed to exploring how best 
to preserve these lands in the face 
of a growing and dynamic cityscape. 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP81

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP82

GOAL 14.  
COMBATTING  
CLIMATE CHANGE

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

83

14.1

MANAGE SEATTLE’S CONGESTION IN 
A FAIR AND EQUITABLE WAY

Transportation is Seattle’s greatest 
contributor to greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions citywide. The City 
of Seattle is in the early stages of 
gathering feedback, studying options, 
and using community perspectives 
to thoughtfully design a potential 
program to shorten commutes and 
reduce carbon emissions effectively, 
that is equitable, transparent, and 
responsive to the city’s needs. 

As a first step, the City started 
exploring congestion pricing to 
address traffic congestion, reduce 
GHG emissions, and create a more 
equitable transportation system. 
Congestion pricing is one strategy 
that cities around the world use to 
improve mobility by charging a fee or 
toll for single-occupancy vehicles to 
use specific downtown streets. This 
work will prioritize racial and social 
justice and explore how a pricing 

program might improve access 
to opportunity and reduce current 
inequities. The Seattle Congestion 
Pricing Study summary report23 in-
cludes highlights of our work to date, 
lessons other cities have learned, an 
initial analysis of different pricing 
tools, potential equity impacts, and 
next steps for future phases of work.

14.2

CHAMPION ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE 
IN THE DUWAMISH VALLEY

The Duwamish Valley’s South Park 
and Georgetown neighborhoods are 
home to approximately 5,600 people 
and numerous businesses and in-
dustries. They are resilient, close-knit 
communities that are bound together 
by intimate social and cultural ties. 
Yet these Duwamish Valley commu-
nities have experienced documented 
inequities for years. The Duwamish 
River flows through the Duwamish 

Manufacturing and Industrial Center 
and is a 5.5-mile Superfund site.

To respond to this, the City released 
the Duwamish Valley Action Plan24,  
a City-community shared vision to 
promote collaboration and guide 
the City’s work and investments in 
the Duwamish Valley communities 
of South Park and Georgetown for 

years to come. The Duwamish Valley 
Action Plan reflects a shift in City 
work toward strategies that get us 
closer to structural racial equity, it 
describes our efforts to improve 
overall health and well-being in the 
Duwamish Valley and beyond, and it 
demonstrates an ongoing commit-
ment to environmental justice and 
equitable development in this area.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP84

14.3

REDUCE THE NUMBER OF HOMES IN SEATTLE 
THAT ARE DEPENDENT ON OIL HEAT

The City of Seattle has set a target to 
be carbon-neutral by 2050. To be on 
track, the City’s Climate Action Plan 
has a target goal of reducing GHG 
emissions in the residential sector 
by 20% by 2030. In April 2018, Mayor 
Durkan announced her Climate 
Action Strategy, which includes 12 
strategies that will enable Seattle to 
reach its climate goals. One of those 
12 strategies is to identify opportu-
nities to accelerate oil conversions 
to heat pumps, with support to 

low-income households as a priority. 
Of the 180,000 single-family homes 
in Seattle, approximately 18,000 
heat with oil. Of that number, 1,100 
households with lower incomes 
participate in the Seattle City Light 
Utility Discount Program and have 
self identified as oil-heated. 

The Oil-Heated Home Conversion 
program25  provides incentives for 
homeowners to replace oil heating 
systems with clean, efficient electric 

heat pumps. By partnering with a 
heat pump distributor that provides 
matching incentives, the program 
is converting 200 homes per year. 
At the same time, the program is 
also influencing the home heating 
market so that electric heat pumps 
will become a preferred heating 
system. Since its launch in July 
2017, 135 homes have been 
converted, with a GHG emissions 
savings of 5 metric tons of carbon 
dioxide (MTCO2) per home.

14.4

INCREASE SEATTLE’S ELECTRIC VEHICLE 
CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE WITH A FOCUS 
ON UNDERSERVED COMMUNITIES

As improvements to technology 
make electric vehicles more afford-
able to a wider variety of households, 
the City is working to ensure that 
communities across the city have 
access to electric vehicle (EV) 
charging infrastructure. Visible and 
ready access to charging infrastruc-
ture is essential to meet this goal. 

In 2017, a pilot program was initiated 
to permit the installation of publicly 
available EV charging stations on 
non-residential streets in urban 
villages, urban centers, and commer-
cial streets. Seattle has installed EV 
charging stations for residents at 
the Seattle Municipal Tower as well 
as in the Beacon Hill neighborhood.

In addition to this pilot program, the 
City recently passed an EV readiness 
bill that will help to further increase 
access to EV charging infrastructure 
by requiring that all new buildings 
in Seattle with off-street parking—
such as a parking garage—have 
the necessary infrastructure to 
support EV charging stations. 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP85

14.5

REDUCE CARBON EMISSIONS FROM THE CITY 
OF SEATTLE’S BIGGEST POLLUTERS

In addition to creating more EV 
charging infrastructure and expand-
ing residents’ access to more forms 
of alternative transportation, Seattle 
is also looking to curb carbon emis-
sions from our city’s biggest carbon 
emitters. In order to reduce emis-
sions, Seattle is pioneering innovative 
policies that will both reduce our 
carbon footprint and benefit our city. 

Mayor Durkan signed the 2030 
Buildings Pilot, passed by the City 
Council in July 2018. Through this 
pilot, the City will offer additional 
height and floor space incentives 
for up to 20 major renovations 
in urban centers for significant 
upgrades in energy and water use, 
stormwater management, and 
better transportation efficiency. 

In recognition of Seattle’s progress in 
fighting climate change, the city was 
announced as an initial winner of 
Bloomberg’s American Cities Climate 
Challenge. The award grants the City 
of Seattle $2.5 million to invest in 
Seattle’s toughest climate challenges.

14.6

INTEGRATE RESILIENCE AND SUSTAINABILITY 
PRINCIPLES INTO CITY CAPITAL PLANNING

While the City of Seattle is expanding 
public transit and exploring policies 
that will reduce single-occupancy 
vehicle trips, the City is leading the 
way with its own fleet to reduce the 
climate and air pollution from Seat-
tle’s cars and trucks by using Seattle 
City Light’s carbon-neutral electricity.

In April, 2018, Mayor Durkan signed 
two executive orders that embed cli-
mate considerations more fully into 
the City’s operations. The orders fol-
low the release of new bold actions 
in Seattle to reduce carbon pollution 
from our transportation and building 
sectors and make Seattle a national 
leader in fighting climate change. 

The first executive order calls for 
accelerating the electrification of the 
City’s municipal fleet and phasing out 
fossil fuel use in City-owned vehicles 
by 2030. The second executive 
order directs the Office of Sustain-
ability & Environment to develop 
a process for assessing the GHG 
emissions and climate resilience 
of the City’s major policies, capital 
projects, and purchasing decisions.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP86

GOAL 15.  
HARNESSING  
THE POWER OF  
PARTNERSHIPS

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

87

15.1

ESTABLISH AN ADVISORY COUNCIL TO LOOK AT AFFORDABLE 
HOUSING SOLUTIONS FOR ALL INCOME LEVELS

While the private sector has 
responded to market demand 
for smaller apartments in the 
city’s densest neighborhoods and 
nonprofit developers are helping 
respond to the significant need 
for lower-income affordability, 
the “missing middle” has become 
an area of increasing concern.

The Affordable Middle-Income 
Housing Advisory Council will 
focus its efforts on creating more 
rental and ownership housing 
choices for Seattle’s middle-income 
earners. The Advisory Council 
brings expertise in investment 
and housing development and will 
make recommendations based on 

economic analysis with communities 
and neighborhoods throughout our 
city. They will elevate investment 
strategies and innovative construc-
tion models to close the growing 
gap between housing that a City 
subsidy may support and what 
the private market is producing.

15.2

BRING SEATTLE’S VIBRANT AND ENGAGED 
SMALL BUSINESS COMMUNITY TOGETHER

Seattle has a thriving small 
business economy, with about 
36,500 businesses with fewer than 
50 employees. Together, these 
businesses employ nearly 200,000 
people in Seattle—far more than 
our city’s largest single employer.

To better understand the challenges 
facing our city’s small business 
community, Mayor Durkan estab-

lished Seattle’s first Small Business 
Advisory Council (SBAC). SBAC is 
tasked with ensuring that small busi-
nesses both have a role in informing 
policies and programs, and access to 
resources. The Council will provide 
input on the impact of the City’s 
decisions, make policy recommen-
dations, and help increase access 
to the tools and resources that are 
available to small businesses. 

SBAC members will represent 
businesses of different sizes, differ-
ent industries, and different neigh-
borhoods; will come from different 
sectors, stages, and ownership 
models; and will include underrep-
resented entrepreneurs: women, 
immigrants, refugees, people of 
color, and the LGBTQ community. 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP88

15.3

CREATE A REGIONAL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE 
FOR OUR SHARED HOMELESSNESS RESPONSE

While Seattle is at the center of our 
region’s growing homelessness 
challenge—and in many ways is hit 
hardest by the impacts of addressing 
it—the problem does not stop at our 
city’s borders. In order to help ad-

dress gaps in Seattle’s homelessness 
response efforts, the City launched a 
new effort to bring local government, 
service providers, business leaders, 
philanthropists, advocates, people 
with lived experience of homeless-

ness, and local residents together 
to develop innovative solutions 
to the homelessness crisis. This 
new Regional Governance Author-
ity aims to make homelessness 
rare, brief, and non-recurring.

15.4

LEVERAGE THE SIGNIFICANT INNOVATION TALENT IN OUR 
REGION TO HELP SOLVE OUR MOST PRESSING ISSUES  

Thanks to Seattle’s status as an 
emerging technology hub, our city is 
home to some of the world’s most 
innovative thinkers. To leverage this 
substantial talent, and to help ensure 
that the City is well prepared to use 
data and technology solutions for 
Seattle’s challenges, Mayor Durkan 
established the Innovation Advisory 
Council (IAC). The IAC is one of the 

first of its kind in the nation, and will 
tackle challenges that include the 
delivery of basic services, the hous-
ing and homelessness crisis, and 
mobility and transportation issues.

The IAC consists of 16 members 
including Amazon, Microsoft, Expe-
dia, Technology Access Foundation, 

Artefact, F5, Facebook, Flying Fish 
Partners, Loftium, Twitter, Tableau, 
We Count, University of Washington, 
Washington Technology Industry 
Association, and Zillow. The IAC 
program includes a knowledge-ex-
change learning series that invites 
keynote speakers to discuss new 
technology and process manage-
ment tools with City of Seattle staff. 

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP15.5

STRIVE FOR BUILDING EFFICIENCY TO 
FURTHER OUR SUSTAINABILITY GOALS

The Seattle 2030 District works 
to break down market barriers to 
building efficiency in an effort to 
make Seattle and its surrounding 
communities more sustainable, and 
to contribute to the region’s envi-
ronmental resilience, livability, and 
affordability. It is an interdisciplinary 
public-private collaboration to create 
a groundbreaking, high-performance 
building district in downtown Seattle. 

By achieving the 2030 Challenge 
targets at a district scale and 
focusing on existing medium to large 

buildings that are privately owned, 
the Seattle 2030 District will provide 
a model that other cities and regions 
can use to reduce emissions and 
impacts. While individual buildings 
will have specific opportunities 
for energy reductions, a district 
approach offers the opportunity for 
district-wide heat recovery, distrib-
uted generation, and other district 
energy efficiencies that can reduce 
the demand for resources. This 
effort gives members a roadmap to 
own, manage, and develop high-per-
formance buildings by leveraging 

89

existing market resources and 
creating new tools and partnerships 
to overcome current market barriers. 
This type of collaborative action is a 
strategic undertaking to help the City 
of Seattle meet its goal of carbon 
neutrality by 2030, and it represents 
a major investment in Seattle’s 
future. Seattle has 58 million square 
feet committed to this challenge. 

THE CITY OF THE FUTURE

Seattle is committed to moving forward together—to bringing community advocates, businesses, philanthro-
pies, government agencies, and nonprofits to the table to find lasting solutions to some of our region’s biggest 
problems. We also know that it’s impossible for any one city to achieve resiliency on its own. We are proud to 
be part of the 100 Resilient Cities Network. This unique Network gives Seattle the chance to work closely with 
other vanguard cities that are working to create a better future for generations to come all across the world. 
We understand and value the power of these partnerships. There is difficult work ahead of us, and we know 
that the only way to move forward and protect our shared future is to step up and do that work together.

SEATTLE—FUTURE CITY: RESILIENCE ROADMAP

90

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Seattle—Future City: Resilience Roadmap would not have been possible without invaluable thought partnership and 
financial support from the team at 100 Resilient Cities and The Rockefeller Foundation, especially Otis Rolley, Corinne Le-
tourneau and Anna Friedman, from AECOM Consulting, and from City of Seattle staff across multiple departments. Special 
thanks must go to Anthony Derrick of the Mayor’s Communications team; Edie Gilliss, the Mayor’s Policy Director; Jessica 
Finn Coven, Seattle’s first Chief Resilience Officer; and IHS Markit for providing critical data and analysis on future jobs. 

ENDNOTES

91

1. 

https://www.seattle.gov/opcd/population-and-demographics/about-seattle#population; https://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/
data/114000-more-people-seattle-now-this-decades-fastest-growing-big-city-in-all-of-united-states/; https://dashboards.mysidewalk.com/
seattle-wa-economy-entrepreneurship/; https://www.seattleschools.org/departments/english_language_learners/honoring_home_languag-
es; https://www.tpl.org/city/seattle-washington; https://www.businessinsider.com/average-household-income-biggest-us-cities-2018-12; 
ACS 2017 5-year Estimate; https://www.seattle.gov/Documents/Departments/OPCD/Demographics/AboutSeattle/CouncilAdopted2016_Ap-
pendices.pdf; https://www.seattlebusinessmag.com/technology/seattle-rocks-tech-startup-hub-some-cities-are-gaining-ground
https://www.seattle.gov/opcd/population-and-demographics/about-seattle#populationTomTom Traffic Index 2016
https://www.seattleschools.org/departments/english_language_learners/honoring_home_languages
http://www.urbancondospaces.com/10-year-chart-seattle-real-estate-is-mind-blowing/
https://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/data/report-family-of-4-needs-76000-just-to-scrape-by-in-seattle/
ACS 2017 5-year Estimate, https://www.businessinsider.com/average-household-income-biggest-us-cities-2018-12
https://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/data/seattle-hits-record-high-for-income-inequality-now-rivals-san-francisco/
ACS 2017 1 Year Sample
https://www.seattle.gov/documents/departments/civilrights/2016%20RSJI%20Community%20survey.pdf

2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10.  https://seattlepromise.seattlecolleges.edu/
11.  Carl Benedict Frey and Michael Osborne, “The Future of Employment:  How Susceptible Are 

Jobs to Computerisation?” Oxford University paper, September 17, 2013.

12.  http://www.seattle.gov/documents/departments/mayordurkan/Executive-Order-2017-12-(Rental-Housing-Assistance)-FINAL-11.28.17.pdf
13.  https://durkan.seattle.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/2019-02-20-Executive-Order-2019-02-Affordability-and-Anti-displacement.pdf 
14.  http://www.seattle.gov/affordable
15.  https://www.freshbuckseattle.org/our-story/
16.  https://www.freshbuckseattle.org/find-your-market/
17.  http://seattle.legistar.com/LegislationDetail.aspx?ID=3532201&GUID=232AE887-44C6-4450-A040-84225AD4F11D
18.  https://library.municode.com/wa/seattle/codes/municipal_code?nodeId=TIT14HURI_CH14.25HOEMHESA
19.  http://durkan.seattle.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/09.21.18-Anti-Harassment-and-Anti-Discrimination-EO.pdf
20.  http://www.seattle.gov/city-purchasing-and-contracting/priority-hire 
21.  http://web6.seattle.gov/FAS/Registration/Default.aspx
22.  https://omwbe.wa.gov/
23.  http://www.seattle.gov/Documents/Departments/SDOT/About/SeattleCongestionPricingStudy_SummaryReport_20190520.pdf 
24.  http://greenspace.seattle.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/DuwamishValleyActionPlan_June2018.pdf 
25.  http://www.seattle.gov/environment/climate-change/buildings-and-energy

RESILIENT
SEATTLE

