RESILIENT
ATLANTA 

Actions to Build an Equitable Future

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE OF CONTENTS

04  Letter from Michael Berkowitz, 100 Resilient Cities
05  Letter from Mayor Kasim Reed
06  Letter from Chief Resilience Officer 
        Stephanie Stuckey
08  Executive Summary
10 

Introduction
10. 100 Resilient Cities Overview
12. Developing Resilient Atlanta
16. Leveraging Atlanta’s Existing Plans
20. Atlanta’s Resilience Challenges 
28. Organizing Vision for Resilient Atlanta
29. A Guide to the Strategy
30. City Resilience Framework

32  Vision 1: Preserve and Celebrate Who We Are

34. Overview of Targets
38. Target 1.1: Become a national leader by 2022 in addressing structural racism,       

reconciling historic racism, and promoting racial equity

     

40. Target 1.2: Document and share the stories of Atlanta’s 242 neighborhoods and Metro      

 Atlanta’s 29 counties

42. Target 1.3: Build Atlanta’s arts and culture sector to become one of the city’s fastest    

growing industries by 2025

46  Vision 2: Enable All Metro Atlantans to Prosper

48. Overview of Targets
52. Target 2.1: Prepare 100 percent of Metro Atlanta’s children for kindergarten
54. Target 2.2:  Connect 10,000 Metro Atlantans to at least 10,000 new livable wage jobs 
by 2020
58. Target 2.3: Ensure career choice in Metro Atlanta
60. Partner Feature: BeltLine Initiatives

TABLE OF CONTENTS

66  Vision 3: Build Our Future City Today

68.  Overview of Targets
72.  Target 3.1: Improve quality, access, and distribution of affordable housing in 

Metro Atlanta

77.  Target 3.2: Improve access to transportation across Metro Atlanta
78.  Partner Feature: MARTA Initiatives
82.  Target 3.3: Ensure every Atlantan lives within one-half mile of fresh food by 2025
84.  Target 3.4: Create 500 new acres of publicly accessible greenspace by 2022
87.  Target 3.5: Install sustainable energy- and water-efficient infrastructure 
improvements in public spaces as well as around 500 homes and businesses each year
94  Vision 4: Design Our Systems to Reflect Our Values

96.  Overview of Targets
100. Target 4.1: Adapt and expand City systems to promote resilience planning by 2022
106. Target 4.2: Support policies and systems to increase civic participation from 

Metro Atlantans

110. Target 4.3: Achieve 100 percent use of clean energy citywide by 2035
112. Target 4.4: Improve public safety and community preparedness by strengthening        

community cohesion and program evaluation

116. Target 4.5:  Promote Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport into a national 
model for resilience, sustainability, and workforce development by 2025
118. Partner Feature: Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport Initiatives

122 Platform Partner Spotlight 
124 Call to Action
126  Appendices

126. Summary of Actions
142. Sources/Citations
144. Acknowledgments

2

3

INTRODUCTORY LETTER MICHAEL BERKOWITZ        

INTRODUCTORY LETTER KASIM REED

On behalf of the entire 100 Resilient Cities team, 
I  want  to  congratulate  Mayor  Kasim  Reed, 
Chief Resilience Officer Stephanie Stuckey, and 
the  City  of  Atlanta  on  the  release  of  Resilient 
Atlanta, a major milestone for the city and for 
our  partnership.  This  document  lays  out  an 
extraordinary  vision  of  urban  resilience  that 
can serve as a model to all and further burnish 
Atlanta’s role as a pioneer in urban innovation 
and  “first  to  the  future.”  This  is  the  10th 
Resilience Strategy released in the United States, 
our  36th  globally,  and  we  are  excited  about 
the  lessons  learned  to  date  reflected  in  this 
innovative  document,  as  well  as  what  Atlanta 
is  poised  to  teach  our  global  network  and  the 
world by developing a Strategy with keen focus 
on implementation.
 
Atlanta  has  modeled  strength  and  ingenuity 
and  is  a  valuable  addition  to  a  network  of 
cities that are redefining what urban resilience 
means.  Under  the  leadership  of  Mayor  Reed, 
the city has already begun making great strides 
towards  securing  a vibrant  future.  It  has  done 
so by embracing its diversity; breathing new life 
into its communities; investing in its own local 
talent,  as  well  as  attracting  new  talent  from 
across  the  U.S.  and  abroad;  and,  importantly, 
creating  powerful  partnerships  with  different 
stakeholders  to  create  the  kinds  of  lasting 
institutions that can anchor the city’s potential. 
Recent major civic projects such as the BeltLine, 
and investment in the city’s infrastructure that 
looks  ahead  several  generations,  reflect  this 
energy  and  commitment  and  the  feeling  of 

4

shared purpose that can realize the visions of this 
ambitious Strategy.
 
Resilient Atlanta builds  on  both  the  challenges 
and  opportunities  the  city  faces  in  order  to 
ensure its resilience as it continues to grow as 
a  national  and  global  leader.  Several  themes 
guide  its  goals:  equity,  regional  partnerships, 
and accountability to measure progress. These 
principles are broken down into concrete Targets 
and  Actions,  such  as:  creating  a  system  to 
ensure equity and resilience in public investment, 
completing construction of the first segment of 
the  Proctor  Creek  Greenway  by  January  2018, 
and eliminating the waiting lists for  Pre-K for 
all  4-year-olds.  Many  other  initiatives  abound 
that  directly  address  the  city’s  shocks  and 
stresses, such as economic inequity, inadequate 
urban  mobility,  and  destructive  storms  that 
can  upend  years  of  hard  work.  The  Strategy 
also,  importantly,  reckons  with  the  specter  of 
structural  racism  and  builds  on  Atlanta’s  long 
history of civil rights to do so.
 
This Strategy reflects months of effort and tireless 
leadership, but in many ways the hard work is just 
beginning. We are excited to continue the next 
stage of our partnership and collaborate in the 
implementation of this groundbreaking Strategy 
that will help ensure a resilient future for Atlanta 
and propel the resilience effort worldwide.

— Michael Berkowitz 
 President, 100 Resilient Cities

“

 This Strategy is a cohesive roadmap 

with ambitious, yet practical, 

initiatives that position Atlanta to 
be a global leader in the urban 

resilience movement.

 “

Since  our  founding  nearly  200  years  ago, 
Atlanta’s  progress  has  been  ever-upward 
because  we  have  responded  to  each  crisis  as 
an opportunity to be reborn stronger, safer, and 
better connected than before.
 
From  being  reduced  to  ashes  during  the  Civil 
War  to  becoming  the  economic  hub  of  the 
Southeastern  United  States,  from  segregation 
and Jim  Crow  to  the  cradle  of  the  Civil  Rights 
Movement,  from  a  railroad  terminus  to  the 
most-traveled airport in the world – our progress 
has  been  hard-fought  but  always  strongest 
when built together.
 
Today  Atlanta  is  stronger  than  ever,  but  not 
without its vulnerabilities:flooding, infrastructure 
collapse,  and  cybersecurity  threats  are  sudden 
and  painful  shocks  we  must  prepare  for  and 
protect against; while lack of affordable housing 
and  public  transit,  income  and  opportunity 
disparities,  and  continued 
tensions 
represent  chronic  stresses  we  must  address 
head-on and united.

racial 

Resilient Atlanta represents more than just the 
input  of  thousands  of  community  members, 
business owners, students, entrepreneurs, faith 
leaders,  and  local  activists.  It  is  a  cohesive 
roadmap with ambitious, yet practical, initiatives 
that position Atlanta to be a global leader in the 
urban resilience movement.
 
In  fact,  we  know  progress  cannot  wait,  and 
we have already begun to implement some of 
the solutions outlined in our Strategy, including 
AgLanta Grows-a-Lot program, committing to 
100 percent clean energy by 2035, and working 
with  public  and  private  partners  to  provide 
funding and resources to incentivize affordable 
housing development.
 
Being Mayor of Atlanta is the fulfillment of my 
lifelong  dream.  It  has  truly  been  an  honor  to 
serve  as  the  59th  Mayor  of Atlanta,  especially 
during such a pivotal time in our city’s history as 
we emerge as a world-class leader in innovation, 
technology, and sustainability.
 
Most  importantly,  I  sincerely  appreciate  the 
people of Atlanta who have been and will always 
be  the  key  to  making Atlanta  a  more  resilient 
and equitable city for all who call it home.

— Kasim Reed 
Mayor

5

INTRODUCTORY LETTER STEPHANIE STUCKEY

I  am  proud  to  present  Resilient  Atlanta,  a 
forward-thinking  strategy 
is  action-
oriented  and  reflects  a  year  of  tireless  effort 
and collaboration.

that 

Atlanta is a city of contrasts. We are home to 
some  of  the  largest  corporations  in  the  world 
and some of the most progressive philanthropic 
institutions,  yet  we  rank  among  the  top  cities 
for  income  disparities.  We  have  world-class 
colleges  and  universities,  yet  our  K-12  system 
needs  improvement.  We  are  the  cradle  of 
the  Civil  Rights  Movement –  the  birthplace  of 
Martin  Luther  King,  Jr.  –  yet  we  still  struggle 
with  racism  and  inequality.  Only  by  preparing 
Atlanta’s individuals, communities, institutions, 
businesses, and systems to survive, adapt, and 
grow no matter what chronic stresses and acute 
shocks we experience can we bring our city closer 
to our vision of resilience.

Resilient  Atlanta  is  framed  by  four  visions,  16 
measurable targets, and nearly 60 concrete and 
deliverable actions. It seeks to:
-   Preserve and Celebrate Who We Are;
-   Enable All Metro Atlantans to Prosper;
-   Build Our Future City Today; and
-   Design Our Systems to Reflect Our Values.

It  is  a  holistic  roadmap  with  initiatives  that 
maximize  the  city’s  assets,  like  strengthening 
Atlanta’s  arts  and  culture  sectors  to  promote 
economic  development,  connecting  Metro 
Atlantans to new careers and skill development 
opportunities, as well as revamping city policies 
and  systems  to  encourage  civic  participation 
from  all  residents.  Other  such  comprehensive 
projects  abound,  many  of  which  leverage  the 
good work already being done by our partners in 
the public and private sectors.

6

In  fact,  several 

improved  access 

intentional,  as  we  are 

Atlanta’s  Strategy  is  drafted  with  verbs.  This 
is 
laser-focused  on 
implementation. 
initiatives 
are  already  underway,  including  Atlanta’s  first 
food forest, an affordable housing assessment, 
and 
to  non-automobile 
transportation  methods.  We  know  that  our 
success will not be measured only by how well 
we plan but also by how well we act to positively 
impact  the  lives  of  all  Metro  Atlantans.  While 
the Strategy is aimed at long-term visions, the 
Actions  have  time  frames  for  completion.  We 
are  committed  to  annual  updates  to  keep  us 
honest and accountable as well as full strategy 
refreshes every four years to adapt to our ever-
changing landscape.

Resilience  starts  with  all  of  us.  I  want  to 
acknowledge and sincerely thank the generosity 
of time and talent from stakeholders, volunteers, 
and  citizens  in  creating  this  vision  of  our  city 
that  is  open,  diverse,  and  proactive.  Most 
importantly,  my  heartfelt  thanks  goes  out  to 
the  neighbors  and  residents  who  shared  with 
us your aspirations for a more resilient Atlanta. 
This Strategy belongs to all of you. I hope it will 
inspire  us  to  work  together  to  create  a  world-
class city of the future.

As  the  city  and  region  continue  to  transform, 
the resilient city envisioned in this Strategy will 
only be achieved with the support of Atlanta’s 
stakeholders.  Your  input  is  important  and  will 
continue  to  shape  the  Strategy  and Actions  in 
the years ahead. If you would like to partner on 
any initiatives, please contact 
resilient@atlantaga.gov or 404-865-8715. 

— Stephanie Stuckey 
 Chief Resilience Officer

SCADpad. 
Photo Credit: City of Atlanta

7

INTRODUCTION EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY  

Atlanta’s city symbol is the phoenix – a mythical 
bird  that  is  cyclically  reborn  from  the  ashes  of 
its past. This symbol was adopted in the period 
after the Civil War when, after being burned to 
the  ground  during  General  Sherman’s  March 
to  the  Sea, Atlanta  reemerged  from  the  ashes 
and  completely  rebuilt  itself.  The  symbol  took 
on  renewed  meaning  in  the  1960s  when  the 
city  became  the  birthplace  of  the  Civil  Rights 
Movement.  Throughout  the  mid-20th  century, 
the  city  served  as  a  beacon  of  economic 
opportunity for all races, particularly among the 
Black population, with a robust industrial sector 
from  the  railroads  and  a  burgeoning  business 
sector.
 
In the late 20th century, however, much of the 
city’s  population,  especially  White  residents, 
moved  to  the  suburbs.  Suburban  sprawl,  in 
part,  prompted  large-scale  development  of 
the  region’s  highway  network.  This  geographic 
shift  in  population  from  the  city’s  downtown 
core  to  its  outer  suburbs  occurred  as  the  city 
experienced a decline in industry and a waning 
economy. Despite the city’s history as a leader 
in  Civil  Rights,  Atlanta’s  Black  population  was 
disproportionately impacted by the city’s rapid 
de-urbanization and economic decline, which is a 
reality that remains in place today. Now, Atlanta 
has  the  opportunity  to  emerge  from  the  past 
40 years and embrace its current tidal wave of 
growth to become the Beloved Community that 
Martin Luther King, Jr., and countless Atlantans 
of all races, envisioned so many decades ago. To 
become the city we desire, we must strengthen 
Atlanta’s resilience.
 
But  it  is  important  to  remember  that  Atlanta 
is more than a city; it sits within an expansive 
Metro region. Metro Atlanta is comprised of 29 
vibrant  counties,  home  to  5.6  million  people 
today,  and  projected  to  grow  to  8  million 
people by 2040. One factor attracting regional 

8

population and job growth is Atlanta’s position 
as a transportation hub, not just for the country 
but  for  the  world.  Hartsfield-Jackson  Atlanta 
International  Airport 
is  the  most  traveled 
airport in the world for daily passenger flights. 
Additionally,  Atlanta’s  ability  to  attract  and 
retain major corporations, including 15 Fortune 
500 companies, is a strength to build upon. These 
corporations not only serve as major economic 
drivers but as key contributors to the civic, social, 
and  philanthropic  vitality  of  the  Metro  region. 
While this Strategy originates with the city, it is 
meant to encompass and benefit the region as 
a whole, just as shocks and stresses affect the 
region as a whole – for we are greater together 
as a unified region than as siloed jurisdictions.

Resilient Atlanta includes a comprehensive and 
actionable  set  of  Visions,  Targets,  and  Actions 
that addresses the region’s most pressing stresses 
and  seeks  to  build  capacity  among  residents 
and  city  systems  alike  to  better  withstand 
future  shocks.  The  Strategy  is  organized  into 
four leading Visions which reflect residents’ and 
stakeholders’  aspirations  for  Atlanta’s  future. 
We have set Targets supported by Actions that 
detail  specific  programs  and  policies  to  realize 
each Vision:

Vision  1:  Preserve  and  Celebrate 
Who We Are. 

Preserve  and  enhance  Metro  Atlanta’s  culture, 
shared  identity,  and  history  to  build  social 
cohesion  and  cultivate  the  creative  economy. 
The  Targets  and  Actions  under  this  Vision  aim 
to increase community cohesion, address racial 
inequity,  and  strengthen  Atlanta’s  culture  and 
creative economy.

Vision  2:  Enable  all  Metro  Atlantans 
to Prosper. 

Reduce  the  barriers  preventing Atlantans  from 
achieving  economic  stability  and  security  to 
increase  access  to  opportunity  and  move 
Atlanta out of the nation’s top 10 cities ranked 
for  income  inequality. The Targets  and Actions 
under  this  Vision  support  improving  economic 
mobility and inter-generational wealth building 
by  focusing  on  early  childhood  education  and 
workforce development opportunities for all.

Vision 3: Build Our Future City Today. 

Facilitate the development of an equitable and 
inclusive  city  while  preserving  and  expanding 
Atlanta’s natural environment. The Targets and 
Actions under this Vision foster vibrant, healthy, 
and equitable neighborhoods that will improve 
the  quality  of  life  for  all  Atlantans  through 
expansion of affordable housing, diversification 
of  transportation  modes,  increased  access  to 
fresh  food,  improved  proximity  to  greenspace 
for  recreational  use,  as  well  as  investments 
in  sustainable  and 
infrastructure 
improvements.

resilient 

Vision  4:  Design  Our  Systems  to 
Reflect Our Values. 

Adapt Atlanta’s civic systems to enable the City 
to  become  a  leader  in  equity,  sustainability, 
and  resilience.  The  Targets  and  Actions  under 
this  Vision  seek  to  improve  the  efficiency  and 
usability  of  city  systems  to  encourage  greater 
civic engagement and institutionalize use of the 
resilience  lens  among  decision  makers  across 
Atlanta.

Public,  private,  and  nonprofit  partners  across 
the city are already engaged in this process and 
have taken the lead on the nearly 60 strategic 
Actions  outlined  in  the  Strategy. Together,  this 
resilience  framework  sets  the  foundation  for  a 
stronger, cross-collaborative regional approach 
to problem solving and resilience building. 

INTRODUCTION EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Resilient  Atlanta  is  an  aspirational  strategy 
which  builds  on  the  strengths  of  regional 
growth,  diversity,  and 
integration,  while 
addressing key challenges that face the region. 
The Visions, Targets, and Actions included in the 
Strategy  were  developed  with  input  from  over 
7,000  Metro  Atlantans,  including  1,000  online 
survey respondents, more than 100 stakeholder 
interviews,  40  public  events,  and  over  100 
Working  Group  members  comprised  of  public, 
private,  nonprofit,  and  community  experts  as 
well as everyday residents. It builds on existing 
plans,  expands  strategic 
initiatives  already 
underway,  and  develops  innovative  Actions  to 
create  a  more  resilient  and  equitable  Atlanta. 
The result is a collaborative, action driven plan 
which  will  serve  as  a  blueprint  of  how Atlanta 
can  rise  up  from  the  ashes  regardless  of  the 
shocks and stresses encountered.
 
As a living document, we will work closely with 
the  new  Mayor,  set  to  assume  office  in  2018, 
to  adapt  the  Strategy  to  align  with  the  new 
administration’s  priorities.  In  addition,  we  will 
conduct full updates to the Strategy every four 
years,  supplemented  by  report  cards  assessing 
our  progress  which  will  be  released  at  the 
beginning  of  each  fiscal  year,  starting  in  July 
2019.  Please  visit  www.resilientatlanta.com  for 
the latest on updates, events, and opportunities 
to get involved.

53

32

31

25

20

10

15

13

 
Community 
Cohesion

Housing 
Insecurity

Infrastructure 
Deficiencies

Education

Economic 
Inequality

Environmental 

Stresses

Mobility & 
Public Transit

Communication 
& Collaboration

Number of Resilient Atlanta Actions 
Addressing the City’s Resilience Challenges 

9

INTRODUCTION 100 RESILIENT CITIES OVERVIEW

100 RESILIENT CITIES 
OVERVIEW

100 Resilient Cities—Pioneered by The Rockefeller 
Foundation  (100RC)  helps  cities  around  the 
world  become  more  resilient  to  the  physical, 
social,  and  economic  challenges  that  are  a 
growing part of the 21st century. 100RC provides 
this  assistance  through:  funding  for  a  Chief 
Resilience Officer in each member city who will 
lead the resilience efforts; resources for drafting 
a  resilience  strategy;  access  to  private  sector, 
public sector, academic, and non-governmental 
(NGO)  resilience  tools;  and  membership  in 
a  global  network  of  peer  cities  to  share  best 
practices and challenges.

Atlanta  joined  the  100RC  network  as  part  of 
the  third  wave  of  cities  selected  in  2016,  and 
through 
is  committed  to 
demonstrating  global  leadership  in  resilience 
and taking advantage of membership resources 
and opportunities.

its  participation, 

100RC supports the adoption and incorporation 
of  a  view  of  resilience  that  includes  not  just 
shocks –  such  as  floods,  infrastructure  failure, 
and other acute events – but also stresses that 
weaken the fabric of a city on a day-to-day or 
cyclical  basis,  such  as  economic  hardship  or 
social inequality. By addressing both shocks and 
stresses  in  a  holistic  manner,  a  city  becomes 
more able to respond to adverse events and is 
better  able  to  deliver  basic  functions  in  both 
good times and bad.

What is Resilience? 

is  the  capacity  of 

Resilience 
individuals, 
communities, 
institutions,  businesses,  and 
systems  within  a  city  to  survive,  adapt,  and 
thrive no matter what kinds of chronic stresses 
and acute shocks they experience.

Resilient  Cities  Demonstrate  Seven 
Qualities:
 
Reflectiveness and resourcefulness are about 
the  ability  to  learn  from  the  past  and  act  in 
times of crisis. Individuals and institutions that 
are  reflective  use  past  experience  to  inform 
future decisions, and will modify standards and 
behaviors accordingly.

Resourceful people and institutions are able to 
recognize  alternative ways  to  use  resources  at 
times  of  crisis  in  order  to  meet  their  needs  or 
achieve their goals. 

Robustness,  redundancy,  and  flexibility  are 
qualities that help to conceive systems and assets 
that can withstand shocks and stresses as well 
as  the  willingness  to  use  alternative  strategies 
to  facilitate  rapid  recovery.  Robust  design  is 
well-conceived, constructed, and managed and 
includes  making  provisions  to  ensure  failure  is 
predictable,  safe,  and  not  disproportionate  to 
the cause. For example, protective infrastructure 
that is robust will not fail catastrophically when 
design thresholds are exceeded.

Redundancy refers to spare capacity purposively 
created  to  accommodate  disruption  due  to 
extreme  pressures,  surges  in  demand,  or  an 
external event. It includes diversity where there 
are  multiple  ways  to  achieve  a  given  need. 
For  example,  energy  systems  that  incorporate 
redundancy provide multiple delivery pathways 
that  can  accommodate  surges  in  demand  or 
disruption to supply networks. 

Flexibility  refers  to  the  willingness  and  ability 
to  adopt  alternative  strategies  in  response 
to  changing  circumstances  or  sudden  crises. 
Systems  can  be  made  more  flexible  through 
introducing  new  technologies  or  knowledge, 
including recognizing traditional practices. 

10

INTRODUCTION 100 RESILIENT CITIES OVERVIEW

The Resilience Dividend

By  investing  in  resilience-building  actions  and 
initiatives, cities stand to reduce the impact of 
acute  shocks  and  chronic  stresses  –  including 
those  which  cannot  easily  be  predicted  today. 
As  cities  continue  to  invest  in  resilience  and 
implement 
resilience-building 
actions,  they  will 
for 
individuals,  the  physical  environment,  and  the 
economy for future residents to enjoy.

improve  outcomes 

integrated 

relate 

integrated 

Inclusive  and 
the 
processes  of  good  governance  and  effective 
leadership that ensure investments and actions 
are appropriate, address the needs of the most 
vulnerable, and collectively create a resilient city 
– for everyone.

to 

Inclusive  processes  emphasize  the  need  for 
broad  consultation  and  ‘many  seats  at  the 
table’ to create a sense of shared ownership or a 
joint vision to build city resilience. 

Integrated  processes  bring  together  systems 
and institutions and can also catalyze additional 
benefits as resources are shared and actors are 
enabled  to  work  together  to  achieve  greater 
ends. For example, integrated city plans enable 
a  city  to  deal  with  multidisciplinary  issues  like 
climate  change,  disaster  risk  reduction,  and 
emergency response through coordination.

Building Resilience

Building resilience starts by identifying our most important problems first and figuring 
out the best ways to tackle them together. For example, solutions that make healthcare 
more accessible can also keep our communities safer from crime and better prepared to 
handle emergencies. By considering how one policy can benefit the most people, resilience 
helps  everyone  in  the  city,  not  just  the wealthy  and  powerful,  and  ensures  our  city 
grows stronger, not just bigger.

The Atlanta Ferris Wheel at sunset in Downtown Atlanta. 
Photo Credit: Mr.Carmichae1

11

INTRODUCTION DEVELOPING RESILIENT ATLANTA

DEVELOPING 
RESILIENT ATLANTA

On  September  19,  2016,  the  City  of  Atlanta 
hosted  an  Agenda  Setting  Workshop  at  The 
Carter Center. It was well attended by a diverse 
cross section of Atlanta stakeholders and was the 
initial kick-off of the Resilient Atlanta effort. In 
November 2016, the City of Atlanta hired its first 
Chief  Resilience  Officer  (CRO)  and  expanded, 
restructured,  and  renamed  the  Mayor’s  Office 
of  Sustainability  to  become  the  Mayor’s  Office 
of Resilience. The CRO is an innovative position 
in  city  government  that  serves  on  the  Mayor’s 
Cabinet and coordinates resilience efforts across 
the City.

From November 2016 to October 2017, Atlanta’s 
CRO  and  her  team  worked  with  over  7,000 
Metro Atlantans to develop a clear actionable 
set of initiatives that articulate their aspirations 
for  the  city’s  future.  Diversity  is  a  cornerstone 
of  Atlanta’s  rich  history  and  culture,  so  the 
process was designed to ensure a broad range 
of  participants  representing  Metro  Atlanta’s 
communities, neighborhoods, and perspectives.

The  process  was  conducted  in  two  phases. 
The  first  phase 
included  a  comprehensive 
campaign  to  engage  Metro  Atlanta  residents 
and  stakeholders  in  discussions  about  their 
strengths  and 
perceptions  of 

the  city’s 

weaknesses – including an online public survey, 
extensive  community  meetings,  and  public 
outreach  –  and 
internal  City  coordination 
across  agencies  and  plans.  The  findings  from 
this  outreach  informed  Atlanta’s  “Preliminary 
Resilience  Assessment,”  which  identified  key 
priority areas that Atlantans agreed need to be 
addressed in order to build the city’s resilience.

Residents and stakeholders who engaged in the 
process consistently expressed shared concerns 
that shaped and reinforced Atlanta’s identified 
shocks  and  stresses. Atlantans  focused  on  the 
need  to  address  poverty  and  socio-economic 
inequity  in  the  city  and  thus  improving  racial, 
economic,  and  social  equity  is  paramount. 
Many Atlantans identified housing and housing 
insecurity as a primary concern, especially in the 
context of increasing gentrification and risk of 
displacement.  Lack  of  affordable  housing  and 
displacement  challenges  are  compounded  by 
some Atlantans’  inability  to  access  and  secure 
employment,  which  in  turn  is  exacerbated  by 
the  city’s  limited  transportation  networks  and 
workforce development. Furthermore, residents 
are  not  confident  in  the  ability  of  the  region’s 
stakeholders  to  improve  critical  services,  such 
as  public 
transportation  and  stormwater 
management.  Finally,  residents  feel  that  there 

Atlanta Resilience Strengths & Weaknesses

Overall Strengths: 
Local identity and culture, 
medical facilities and healthcare, 
local business development and 
innovation, robust and diverse 
local economy, higher education

Overall Weaknesses:
Housing, land use development, 
infrastructure deficiencies, public 
transportation and mobility, 
education (K-12), communication and 
collaboration among stakeholders

12

Atlantans’ Perceptions Based on Community Engagement

INTRODUCTION DEVELOPING RESILIENT ATLANTA

Fosters Long-

Term & Integrated  

Planning

Empowers a 

Broad Range of 
Stakeholders

Promotes 
Leadership 
& Effective 
Management 

Meets Basic 

Needs

Supports 

Livelihoods & 
Employment

Ensures Public 
Health Services

Provides Reliable 
Communication 
& Mobility 

Ensures 

Continuity of 
Critical Services

Provides & 

Enhances Natural 
and Manmade 

Assets

Fosters Economic 

Prosperity

Promotes Cohesive 
& Engaged 
Communities

Ensures Social 

Stability, Security & 

Justice

KEY

Need to do better
Doing well, but 
can improve 

Area of strength

Each segment represents 374 factors

13

INTRODUCTION DEVELOPING RESILIENT ATLANTA

INTRODUCTION DEVELOPING RESILIENT ATLANTA

is  a  need  to  improve  communication  and 
collaboration  between  the  government  and 
the  public  to  foster  an  environment  of  true 
community engagement.

and 

housing 

In the second phase, the CRO and her team led 
five working groups to further explore key priority 
areas:  civic  engagement  and  transparent 
governance, 
neighborhood 
development,  economic  and  social  mobility, 
transit accessibility, and resilient infrastructure. 
To  ensure  full  transparency  and  that  all  of 
the  working  groups  reflected  the  diversity 
of  Metro  Atlanta,  working  group  members 
included representatives from academic, faith-
based,  non-profit,  philanthropic,  and  business 
communities.  Additionally,  consistent  with 
our  commitment  to  inclusion, Atlanta was  the 
first city in the 100RC network to use an open 
nomination  process  for  residents  to  become 
members of the working groups. This facilitated 
open participation from the start and ensured 
community voices were an integral part of the 
Strategy process. The working groups researched 
opportunities  and  identified  specific  initiatives 
for the city to improve each priority area. At the 

conclusion of this engagement in July 2017, the 
Mayor’s Office of Resilience held a public open 
house to share the working groups’ findings with 
the broader Atlanta community, which over 100 
residents and stakeholders attended.

government, 

The  Visions,  Targets,  and  Actions  that  are  the 
bedrock  of  Resilient  Atlanta  are  informed  by 
feedback from residents and stakeholders, and 
are  grounded  in  Atlanta’s  vision  of  realizing  a 
socially, economically, and racially equitable city. 
To achieve the goals outlined in this Strategy, the 
responsibility  for  the  implementation  of  these 
initiatives  must  be  shared  by  all  stakeholders, 
including  City 
community 
partners,  institutions,  and  individual  residents. 
Furthermore,  to  ensure  our  Strategy  adapts 
as we  evolve,  it will  be  a  living  document. The 
Strategy  as  it  stands  has  been  vetted  by  the 
2018 City of Atlanta Mayoral candidates, and we 
will work closely with the new Mayor to update 
the Strategy as needed to align priorities. To that 
end, we will conduct full updates to the Strategy 
every  four  years,  and  we  commit  to  providing 
a report card of our process and updates each 
fiscal year, starting in July 2019.

Resilient Atlanta Development Timeline

SEPTEMBER 2016
The City of Atlanta 
hosted an Agenda 
Setting Workshop.

MAY-JULY 2017

CRO and her team led five working groups 
to further explore key priority areas and 
develop an actionable set of initiatives.

NOVEMBER 2017

The Atlanta Resilience 
Strategy is released to 

the public.

JANUARY-APRIL 2017

JULY 2017

A comprehensive campaign to engage 
over 7,000 Metro Atlanta residents and 
stakeholders on perceptions of the city’s 

strengths and weaknesses.

Mayor's Office of Resilience held 
a public open house to share the 
working group findings with the 

broader Atlanta community.

14

STRATEGY ENGAGEMENT 
FACTS AND FIGURES

From  September  2016  to  October  2017,  the 
City  of  Atlanta  Mayor’s  Office  of  Resilience 
engaged  a  broad  range  of  stakeholders  in  the 
Strategy development process. These individuals 
expressed  shared  concerns  that  shaped  and 
reinforced  Atlanta’s 
identified  shocks  and 
stresses.  Input  spanned  the  Metro  region  and 
allowed the CoA team to gain a holistic picture 
of the city’s needs.

7,000

Metro Atlantans were engaged throughout 
the development of Resilient Atlanta

Including 
engagement 
in 111 unique 
zip codes 

Community 
Outreach 

Depth of 
Feedback

Working Group

Scope

1,000
100 

Respondents answered 
a public survey

Unique stakeholder 
interviews 

40
25
29

Public 
Events

Neighborhood 
Planning Units

Georgia 
counties

100+

Individuals were recruited by the 
Mayor’s Office of Resilience to 
become working group members in 
charge of developing the Visions, 
Targets, and Actions you see in this 
Strategy today

15

INTRODUCTION EXISTING PLANS

LEVERAGING ATLANTA’S  
EXISTING PLANS

Over  the  last  decade,  agencies  and 
organizations  across  Atlanta  have 
produced  a  range  of  reports  and 
frameworks establishing a vision for 
the future of the city. Resilient Atlanta 
builds  on  these  efforts  by  bringing 
together  decades  of  planning  and 
applying a resilience lens to projects 
previously 
identified  or  already 
underway. This Strategy sets specific 
Visions, Targets, and Actions in order 
to  ensure  that  our  future  Atlanta 
is  a  more  equitable,  connected, 
transparent, and sustainable city.

Atlanta Housing Authority Vision 
2022: Live. Work. Thrive. (2017)
a  comprehensive  five  year  strategic  plan  that 
renews  the  organization’s  focus  on  being  the 
frontrunner  of  affordable  housing  in  the  City 
of Atlanta. 

City for All Platform (2017)
an advocacy platform geared at ensuring new 
City of Atlanta leadership will take urgent action 
on housing affordability and accessibility. 

City of Atlanta, Atlanta City Design 
(2017) 
provides  a  design  framework  for  the  City  of 
Atlanta  around  values  of  equity,  progress, 
ambition,  access,  and  nature,  to  create  an 
inclusive future city for all.

16

City of Atlanta Capital Improvement 
Program (2017)
provides  an 
implementation  plan  for  the 
construction,  maintenance,  and  renovation  of 
public facilities and infrastructure over the next 
five years. 

Our Future Atlanta Agenda (2017) 
outlines  an  agenda  for  new  City  of  Atlanta 
leadership to increase government transparency, 
strengthen civil society, ensure equitable growth, 
and create safer and healthier communities.

Partners for HOME ClearPath (2017)
provides  a  five-year  public-private  partnership 
strategy to make homelessness in Atlanta rare, 
brief,  and  non-recurring.  ClearPath  challenges 
the  City  to  end  veteran  homelessness  by  2017, 
end chronic homelessness by 2019, and end both 
youth  homelessness  and  family  homelessness 
by 2020.

that  details 

long-range  blueprint 

Atlanta Regional Commission 
Atlanta Region’s Plan (2016)
a 
the 
investments that will be made over the next 20 
years to provide world-class infrastructure, build 
a competitive economy, and ensure the region 
is comprised of healthy, livable communities. Its 
goals  include:  improving  mobility  by  investing 
over  $93  billion  in  the  region’s  transportation 
infrastructure;  creating  more  vibrant,  walkable 
communities; meeting the needs of the region’s 
fast-growing  population  of  older  adults;  and 
ensuring a supply of clean, abundant water.

City of Atlanta Comprehensive 
Development Plan (2016)
a  guide  for  the  growth  and  development  of 
the  City,  which  identifies  present  and  planned 
physical,  social,  and  economic  development. 

population, 

The plan includes goals, policies, and objectives 
economic 
around 
development, 
historic 
resources, community facilities, transportation, 
land use, and urban design.

housing, 
resources, 

natural 

City of Atlanta Green Infrastructure 
Strategic Action Plan (2016) 
developed  by  the  Department  of  Watershed 
Management with an interdepartmental Green 
Infrastructure Task Force, the plan incorporates 
environmentally 
best 
practices  into  stormwater  management  with 
the  goal  of  reducing  City  water  runoff  by  225 
million gallons annually.

engineering 

sound 

City of Atlanta Capital Improvement 
Program (2015) 
is  a  planning  and  budgeting  tool  for  the 
Department  of  Watershed  Management  that 
organizes system needs and prospective funding 
requirements for a five-year period. It identifies 
requirements  for  sustaining,  restoring,  and 
modernizing  the  facilities  and  infrastructure 
that  support  the  water  system,  wastewater 
system,  combined  sewer  control  facilities,  and 
general maintenance and repair priorities in the 
Atlanta service area.  
City of Atlanta Climate Action Plan 
(2015)
challenges  the  City  to  reduce  greenhouse  gas 
emissions  by  20  percent  below  2009  levels 
by  2020,  and  by  40  percent  below  2009  levels 
by 2030.

Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta 
International Airport Master Plan 
(2015) 
guides  facility  development  to  accommodate 
future  aviation  needs  of  the  Atlanta  region 
throughout a 20-year planning period, focusing 
on  improvements  to  airfield,  terminal/gate, 
landside, and support facilities. 

City of Atlanta Creating Linkages 
and Eliminating Barriers: The 
Strategic Community Investment 

INTRODUCTION EXISTING PLANS

Report (2013)
calls for focusing investments and resources in 
neighborhoods  that  are  currently  in  transition 
or  vulnerable  to  decline  in  order  to  pursue 
equitable growth.

TransFormation Alliance Strategic 
Plan (2013)
works to ensure that opportunities and benefits 
provided by investment in transit communities 
are made available to ALL residents. The work is 
underpinned by racial equity that is responsive 
to  people  within  impacted  communities  by 
incorporating arts and culture-based community 
engagement, and by shaping better health and 
climate outcomes through housing, transit, and 
job access.

Atlanta BeltLine Equitable 
Development Plan (2009)
established 
commitment 
BeltLine’s 
to  principles  of  equitable  and  sustainable 
development that will achieve lasting economic, 
environmental, and social benefits for everyone.

the 

City of Atlanta Project Greenspace 
(2009)
provides a framework and strategy for creating 
a  world-class  greenspace  system  in  Atlanta 
by 2030. 

City of Atlanta Connect Atlanta 
(2008, 2015 appendices)
the first comprehensive transportation plan for 
the City, complete with a list of projects to guide 
major  public  investments  in  transportation  for 
the next quarter century. These investments will 
expand  mobility,  accessibility,  and  mode  share 
options;  support  continued  economic  growth; 
and enhance quality of life for residents, workers, 
and visitors alike.

Atlanta Regional Commission’s 
Livable Centers Initiative (2007)
encourages 
jurisdictions  to  carry  out 
neighborhood-level planning studies that will link 
transportation infrastructure with land use plans 
to create more livable, walkable communities.

local 

17

INTRODUCTION EXISTING PLANS

INTRODUCTION EXISTING PLANS

Existing Plan Alignment with Resilient Atlanta Visions

Existing Plan Alignment with Resilient Atlanta Visions

Vision 02
Enable 
All Metro 

Atlantans to 

Prosper

Vision 02
Enable 
All Metro 

Atlantans to 

Prosper

Vision 03
Build Our 
Future City 

Today

Vision 04
Design Our 
Systems to 
Reflect Our 

Values

Vision 01

Preserve and 
Celebrate Who 

We Are

Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport 
Master Plan (2015)

City of Atlanta Creating Linkages and 
Eliminating Barriers: The Strategic Community 
Investment Report (2013)

TransFormation Alliance Strategic Plan (2013)

Atlanta BeltLine Equitable Development Plan 
(2009)

City of Atlanta Project Greenspace (2009)

City of Atlanta Connect Atlanta Plan (2008, 
2015 appendices)

Atlanta Regional Commission’s Livable Centers 
Initiative (2007)

Vision 01

Preserve and 
Celebrate Who 

We Are

Atlanta Housing Authority Vision 2022 (2017) 

City for All Platform (2017)

City of Atlanta,  Atlanta City Design (2017)

City of Atlanta Capital Improvement Program 
(2017)

Our Future Atlanta Agenda (2017)

Partners for HOME ClearPath (2017)

Atlanta Regional Commission Atlanta Region’s 
Plan (2016)

City of Atlanta Comprehensive Development 
Plan (2016)

City of Atlanta Green Infrastructure Strategic 
Action Plan (2016)

City of Atlanta Capital  Improvement Program 
(2015)

City of Atlanta Climate Action Plan (2015)

18

Vision 03
Build Our 
Future City 

Today

Vision 04
Design Our 
Systems to 
Reflect Our 

Values

19

INTRODUCTION ATLANTA’S RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

ATLANTA’S RESILIENCE 
CHALLENGES

Atlanta,  both  the  city  and  metro 
region,  has  experienced  explosive 
growth  over  the  last  few  decades. 
While residents and new businesses 
alike  are 
increasingly  attracted 
to  the  region,  a  history  of  growth, 
intertwined with periods of suburban 
sprawl,  segregation,  and 
lack  of 
investment 
infrastructure  and 
affordable  housing,  has  left  some 
residents  behind.  To  become  the 
city  we  envision,  we  must  address 
Atlanta’s resilience challenges.

in 

Community Cohesion

Both  the  City  and  region  have  experienced 
significant  growth  over  the  last  decade.  The 
city’s  population  increased  by 12  percent  from 

2010  to  2016,  reaching  473,000  in  2016.  This 
increase  is  slightly  higher  than  that  of  the 
29-county Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA), 
which  grew  10  percent  over  the  same  time 
period.1  Net  domestic  in-migration  has  played 
a major role in the City’s population growth as 
more millennials and middle income Americans 
move to lower cost Sun Belt cities like Atlanta.2 
The  Atlanta  Regional  Commission  estimates 
that by 2040 the wider 20-county Atlanta region 
will  add  2.5  million  people  and  1  million  jobs, 
increasing from 5.6 million to 8.0 million people 
and from 2.9 million to 3.9 million jobs.3
 
Atlanta is among the most ethnically integrated 
cities  in  the  U.S.  Data  released  by  the  Pew 
Research  Center  indicates  that  78  counties 
nationwide  experienced  a  switch  in  majority-
minority population since 2000 and four of these 
counties are located in the Atlanta region.4 The 
city’s  recent  population  growth,  however,  has 
spurred  changing  demographic  changes.  From 
2000-2016  the  percentage  of  city  residents 

Population Change Per Acre 2015-2040 (Percentage)

Population Change Per Acre 2015-2040 (No. of Residents)

1583 - 15000
15001 - 25000
25001 - 40000
40001 - 80000
80001 - 144591

0.07 - 0.25
0.26 - 0.50
0.51 - 0.75
0.76 - 1.50
1.51 - 15.02

Carroll

Bartow

75

Cherokee
57 5

Forsyth

400

Hall

98 5

Paulding

Cobb

20

Douglas

28 5

Fulto n

85

Gwinnett

Barrow

28 5

DeKalb

Walton

67 5

Rockdal e

20

Newton

Carroll

85

Coweta

Fayette

Clayton

Henry

75

Spalding

Population change by percentage and number of residents

20

Bartow

75

Cherokee
57 5

Forsyth

40 0

Hall
98 5

85

Gwinnett

Barrow

28 5
DeKalb

Walton

67 5

Rockdale

20

Clayton

Henry

75

Newton

Paulding

Cobb

20

Douglas

28 5

Fulton

85

Coweta

Fayette

Spalding

Source: “Source: Atlanta 
Regional Commission

INTRODUCTION ATLANTA’S RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

Population Change

12%  
43%   
8M

Atlanta’s population increase 
between 2010-2016

Atlanta’s projected population 
increase, 2015-2040

Number of people expected to 
live in Atlanta by 2040, growing 
from 5.5 million

who identify as either White or Asian increased 
by  7  percentage  points  and  the  percentage  of 
African  American  residents  decreased  by  9 
percentage points.
 
Furthermore, the region remains largely divided 
along  racial  lines  with  the  White  population 
clustered in the north and the Black population 
clustered in the south.

With this rapid population growth, coupled with 
expanding  income  inequality  and  numerous 
high-end real estate investments, Metro Atlanta 
is  at  risk  of  becoming  an  increasingly  divided 
region  –  racially,  socially,  and  geographically. 
Atlanta’s  vibrant  culture  and  history  and  its 

Demographic Changes in Metro Atlanta  
Souce: National Equity Atlas

Black
White
Latino 

Asian 
Other 

% of Non-White Population
While the city is diverse, it is not spatially diverse. The non-white 
population is heavily concentrated in the south and west portions 
of the city. Source: Neighborhood Nexus

6% to 25%
28% to 44%
50% to 63%

65% to 82%
86% to 100%

role  in  the  Civil  Rights  movement  are  two  of 
its  most  unifying  traits;  yet,  if  these  qualities 
are  not  preserved  and  strengthened,  the  city 
could lose part of its tangible heritage. There is a 
need now more than ever to empower residents 
to  strengthen  community 
roots,  preserve 
Atlanta’s history, and embrace a shared, multi-
generational identity.

Economic Inequality

The City of Atlanta accounts for 59 percent of 
State’s economic output despite making up only 
4.8 percent of the State’s population.5 Globally, 
the city’s economy is equally impressive, ranking 
10th in the world economy with a Gross Domestic 
Product  (GDP)  of  approximately  $295  billion.6 
Among the 12 largest U.S. metropolitan regions, 
Atlanta  exhibited  the  fastest  employment 
growth in 2016 with the addition of 75,000 jobs. 
The  entertainment  industry  plays  a  major  role 
in Atlanta’s economy. In 2016, Georgia was the 
number  one  state  in  the  U.S.  for  feature  film 
production.  As  a  result,  the  film  industry  has 
generated thousands of jobs and $6 billion for 
Georgia’s economy in FY 20157 with an estimated 
75-80 percent of productions filmed in the city.8 

21

INTRODUCTION ATLANTA’S RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

INTRODUCTION ATLANTA’S RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

Source: Neighborhood Nexus analysis of the U.S. Census 
Bureau’s 2008 - 2012 American Community Survey

80%

43%

29%

6%

% Children Living in High Poverty 
Communities by Race

It  is  estimated  that  25.5  percent  of  people 
in  the  city  have  incomes  below  the  Federal 
poverty level. Like most cities, Atlanta’s poverty 
is  disproportionately  experienced  by  the  city’s 
Black  residents  with  85  percent  of  Atlanta’s 
Black children living in high poverty communities 
(where  the  poverty  rate  is  higher  than  20 
percent),  compared  with  29  percent  of  Asian 
and  six  percent  of  White  residents.13  Poverty 
and  income  inequality  are  also  divided  along 
geographic lines with the southern and western 
areas of the city particularly vulnerable.
 
Tackling  economic  inequality  is  paramount  to 
creating a resilient, stronger Atlanta. Persistent 
poverty  has  intergenerational  impacts  as  it 
limits the ability of  young people to successfully 
achieve  upward  social  mobility  and  break  the 
cycle  of  poverty  for  the  next  generation.  This 
means  that  we  must  address  inequality  today 
in order to create a stronger Atlanta tomorrow. 
As long as significant swathes of Atlantans lack 
access to quality jobs and stable incomes, the city 
and its residents continue to remain vulnerable to 
systemic stresses.

The  music  industry  similarly  has  a  significant 
impact  on  the  both  the  culture  and  economy 
of Atlanta, contributing $3.7 billion in economic 
impact annually.9
 
Another  asset  critical  to  Atlanta’s  economy  is 
the  Hartsfield-Jackson  Atlanta 
International 
Airport, which is 10th in North America in cargo 
volume and generates $34.8 billion in economic 
activity.10 
The  Hartsfield-Jackson  Atlanta 
International  Airport  has  been  ranked  as  the 
world’s most traveled airport by passenger traffic 
every year since 2000 and is considered a major 
hub  for  travel  throughout  the  southeastern 
United  States.  The  Airport  also  provides  more 
than 63,000 jobs on site, making it the state’s 
largest employer.
 
Despite  Atlanta’s  array  of  economic  assets 
and  recent  economic  growth,  Atlanta  has  the 
highest  income  inequality  of  any  city  in  the 
U.S.  and  has  continued  to  grow  more  unequal 
over  the  past  decade.11  In  2014,  the  poorest 
20  percent  of  households  in  Atlanta  earned 
less  than  $15,000  annually, while  the  richest  5 
percent  of  households  in Atlanta  earned  more 
than  $288,000.12  As  the  gap  grows  between 
rich  and  poor  in  the  city,  the  middle  class  is 
shrinking. Compared to 50 other cities, Atlanta 
has the sixth lowest middle-class population (i.e. 
households  with  $40,000-$100,000  incomes), 
representing 32 percent of the population.
 

$30

$30

$28

$17

$22

$16

$16

$17

r
h
/
e
g
a
W
n
a
d
e
M

 

i

1980

1990

2000

2014

Year

Wage Gap Between White Workers and 
Workers of Color
White Workers
Workers of Color

22

% Population with Less than a High School 

24% to 41.3%
17.5% to <24%
9.6% to <17.5% 

3% to <9.6%
0 to <3% 

% Population without Health Insurance 
Coverage  

28.3% to 41.7%
23.8% to <28.3%
16.7% to <23.8% 

10.3% to <16.7% 
0.3% to <10.3% 

% of the Population in Poverty

Teen Birthrate per 1,000 Births (2008-2012)

41.2% to 71%
32.9% to <41.2%
19.2% to <32.9% 

10.4% to <19.2%
1.9% to <10.4% 

202.5 to 269.1
166.1 to <202.5
114.3 to <166.1 

48.5 to <114.3 
0 to <48.5 

Source: National Equity Atlas

23

INTRODUCTION ATLANTA’S RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

Housing Insecurity

Atlanta’s  economy  and  housing  market  was 
hit  hard  by  the  2008  housing  crisis.  Since 
then,  however,  the  city’s  housing  market  has 
recovered and is currently experiencing a wave 
of  development  and 
investment.  Between 
2000  and  2014,  the  city  added  nearly  40,000 
new  residential  units,  which  grew  the  city’s 
housing  stock  by  21.3  percent.  More  than 
80  percent  of  these  new  units  are  part  of 
multi-unit developments.
 
Although  increased  development  is  a  boon  for 
Atlanta’s  economy,  there  is  growing  concern 
that it has had an adverse effect on affordability. 
A 2015 study by a real estate research firm found 
that from 2012-2014, 95 percent of apartments 
built in Atlanta were classified as luxury rentals.14 
The  study  also  found  that  the  average  rent  in 
the  city  rose  from  $1.62  to  $1.74  per  square 
foot,  or  7  percent,  between  2015  and  2016. 
Simultaneously,  the  number  of  low-cost  rental 
units  (less  than  $750  a  month)  is  declining  by 
4.4 percent per year.
 
Source: Neighborhood Nexus analysis of the U.S. Census 
Bureau’s 2008 - 2012 American Community Survey

As a result of new higher-end development and 
an overall increase in cost of living, coupled with 
below  national  average  household  income,  16 
percent  of  renters  and  homeowners  are  cost 
burdened  by  their  housing  situation  and  are 
housing insecure — spending at least half their 
income on housing costs.15 More specifically, 26 
percent of renters are extremely cost burdened 
(spending more than 50 percent of their income 
on  housing  costs),  indicating  that  renters  are 
especially vulnerable to changes in the housing 
market.  Since  2009,  the  number  of  extremely 
cost burdened renters has steadily increased.
 
Despite  the  need  for  more  affordable  housing, 
Atlanta  has  a  high  vacant  property  rate  at 
nearly 20 percent (reaching up to 40 percent in 
some  neighborhoods), which  increased  by  two 
percent between 2010 and 2014.16 These vacant 
properties are largely concentrated in the south 
and  west  areas  of  the  city,  which  struggle 
with  blight  and  are  especially  vulnerable  to 
gentrification  forces  as  the  Atlanta  BeltLine 
plans to extend into these neighborhoods. These 
same neighborhoods have a significant number 

% of Units Where Cost of Rent is 30% or 
More of Renter Income

72.7% to 87.9%
62.4% to <72.7%
53.9% t0 <62.4% 

40.9% to <53.9% 
16.9% to <40.9% 

% of Vacant Housing Units

28.9% to <48.9%
22.7% to <28.9%
17.9% to <22.7% 

12% to <17.9% 
6.6% to <12% 

INTRODUCTION ATLANTA’S RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

18%

34%

48%

Housing Occupancy in Atlanta
Source: US Census Bureau, 2016 American Community Survey 
1-Year Estimate

Renter Occupied
Owner Occupied

Vacant

of households that are rent burdened.

Environmental Stresses

In  the  past,  Atlanta  has  normally  experienced 
large amounts of rainfall, evenly spread through 
the  year.  However,  as  one  of  the  few  U.S. 
metropolitan areas not built around a major local 
body of water, the city is particularly vulnerable 
to drought. Exceptionally low amounts of rainfall 
in  the  region  since  2007  have  put  increasing 
pressure on the city’s water supply and recently 
caused  Georgia’s  Environmental  Protection 
Division to declare a Level 2 drought.17 A current 
project to repurpose the Bellwood Quarry as a 
2.5 billion gallon reservoir will increase the city’s 
reserve  supply  from  just  3  days  to  30  days  in 
2018.  Reliability  and  access  to  water,  however, 
will continue to be a resilience issue for Atlanta.
 
In addition to drought, the city faces substantial 
risk  from  rainfall  flooding.  In  September  2009, 
Atlanta  experienced  historic  flash  flooding, 
which resulted in hundreds of millions of dollars 
in  damages  and  the  loss  of  at  least  ten  lives. 
The  flooding  was  so  extreme  that  in  one  24-
hour  period  some  counties  in  the  region  saw 
more than 20 inches of rain, conditions so rare 
that  there  is  only  a  0.01  percent  chance  of 

it  happening  each  year.18  The  severity  of  this 
flooding  was,  in  part,  attributed  to  increased 
concrete surfaces, overfilled sewers, and blocked 
storm drains. Today, the city and region continue 
to face periods of intense flooding.
 
Finally,  increasing  temperatures  and  number 
of  days  with  high  temperatures  pose  a  risk 
to  Atlanta’s  residents  and  the  environment. 
On  average,  across  the  country,  cities  are 
getting hotter faster than adjacent rural areas. 
Assuming  greenhouse  gas  emission  trends 
continue through 2100, within the next century 
Atlanta  will  be  above  95  degrees  Fahrenheit 
for  more  than  three  months  per  year.19  High 
temperatures  are  especially  dangerous  for 
infants  and  the  elderly,  and  those 
living 
without  access  to  air  conditioning  will  be 
disproportionately impacted.

94

s
y
a
D
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

7

47

‘91-’10

2060
Year

2100

Number of Days Above 95 Degrees 
Fahrenheit & Future Predictions

Infrastructural Deficiencies 

In 2014, the American Society of Civil Engineers 
(ASCE) issued an infrastructure report card for 
the  United  States  assessing  the  quality  and 
safety  of  the  nation’s  infrastructure.  Georgia 
received a C overall, with a C- for bridges and 
a  D-  for  transit.20  Despite  continued  growth 
of the Atlanta Metro region, the lack of major 
infrastructure 
1996 
Olympics  places  mounting  pressure  on  already 

investment 

since 

the 

24

25

INTRODUCTION ATLANTA’S RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

stressed  systems.  In  Atlanta,  this  is  evidenced 
by  the  Interstate  85  bridge  collapse  in  March 
2017,  which  demanded  that  the  City  quickly 
expand  its  public  transportation  systems  and 
work collaboratively with employers to mitigate 
commute  challenges.  This  major  shock  also 
exposed the need for system wide improvements 
in  order  to  make  public  transit  and  other 
pedestrian-oriented  options  more  accessible, 
reliable,  and  viable  as  alternatives  to  personal 
automobile use.  
 
The  City  is  making  strides  to  improve  its 
transportation  infrastructure.  In  2015,  the  City 
of  Atlanta  hired  its  first  Chief  Bicycle  Officer 
and in the summer of 2016 launched the Relay 
Bike  Share  program  with  100  bicycles.    In  the  
summer of 2017, Relay Bike Share expanded to 
include  500  bicycles  and  is  poised  to  grow  to 
over  2000  bicycles  at  200  stations  in  coming 
years.  Currently,  the  City  is  expanding  bicycle 
and trailway infrastructure through new Atlanta 
BeltLine and Proctor Creek Greenway trails and 
associated  bike  lanes.  In  2016,  city  residents 
approved two  sales tax referendums to address 
the  city’s  pressing  public  transportation  needs 
by  funding  Metropolitan  Atlanta  Rapid  Transit 
Authority  (MARTA)  expansion,  streetscape 
improvements,  and  bicycle  and  pedestrian 
amenities. Until these projects are implemented, 
however,  large  swaths  of  the  city  remain  car-
dependent and those without vehicles face long 
commutes on public transportation.

In  addition  to  the  city’s  “hard”  infrastructure 
deficiencies,  the  City  also  faces  challenges 
with its “soft” infrastructure. Almost all 242 of 
Atlanta’s neighborhoods and 29 Metro counties 
harbor  food  deserts,  which  is  indicative  of  a 
failing food system. This means that a majority 
of Metro Atlanta’s residents live over a mile from 
a grocery store and, even then, not all grocery 
stores  provide  healthy  food  at  an  affordable 
cost.  Likewise,  the  City’s  safety  systems, 
including community preparedness training and 
neighborhood  policing,  continue  to  improve 
to  ensure  that  all  Atlantans  feel  safe  in  their 
neighborhoods, especially in the event of 
an emergency.
 
Finally,  the  City’s  civic  infrastructure  -  the 
systems  that  facilitate  public  participation 
and  policy  implementation  -  have  not  been 
modernized in decades. For example, the City’s 
Neighborhood  Planning  Units  (NPUs),  which 
were created in the mid-20th century to promote 
civic  participation,  vary  in  effectiveness  from 
neighborhood  to  neighborhood.  Additionally, 
Metro Atlanta is comprised of 29 counties in over 
400 square miles of space, further complicating 
civic participation and coordination.

Atlanta Streetcar. 
Photo Credit: City of Atlanta

26
26

Photo Credit: Central Atlanta 
Progress

27

INTRODUCTION ORGANIZING VISION

ORGANIZING VISION FOR 
RESILIENT ATLANTA

Atlanta  is  at  the  precipice  of  change.  In  the 
past  six  years,  the  city  has  experienced  a 
rapid  influx  of  people,  real  estate  investment, 
and  economic  expansion.  This  new  wave  of 
revitalization  is  evidenced  by  the  mixed-use 
developments popping up across the city, a new 
stadium,  and  state-of-the-art  office  buildings. 
Yet,  this  revitalization  has  only  occurred  in 
some  neighborhoods  and  for  the  benefit  of 
some  people.  Indeed,  parts  of  the  city  have 
flourished, while others have only continued to 
decline.  Furthermore,  these  growing  pressures 
exacerbate the impacts of chronic stresses and 
make it more challenging to respond to sudden 
shocks.    As  the  City  prepares  for  continued 
growth and investment, it is tasked with tackling 
the  foundational  challenges  facing  the  Metro 
region and its residents today in order to ensure 
that  Atlanta  remains  and,  indeed,  becomes  a 
place that is livable, equitable, and accessible for 
all. Issues related to housing, transit, emergency 
response,  infrastructure,  education,  workforce 
training,  health  and  safety,  and  managed 
growth are paramount.

Building  a  resilient Atlanta will  require  that we 
find new approaches to addressing old problems. 
The  Resilient  Atlanta  development  process 
revealed that recurring themes related to social 
equity, culture and identity, and climate remain 
priorities  for  Atlantans.  Rather  than  putting 
each of these topics in their own silo, we have 
included equity, culture and identity, and climate 
throughout the Resilient Atlanta Visions and, in 
doing so, intend to address these priorities, and 
elevate their importance, from multiple angles.

Creating resilience is also a collaborative effort. 
To  build  a  resilient  Atlanta  and  achieve  these 
Visions, we will need to work across geographies, 
neighborhoods,  counties,  regions,  government 
agencies,  institutions,  and  organizations.  We 
will  leverage  the  power  of  data  to  inform  our 
decisions,  enable  collaboration,  and  help  us 
build our future Atlanta today and redefine the 
Atlanta dream.

CRO Stephanie Stuckey at the Midtown Atlanta Streets Alive. 
Photo Credit: Erik Voss

2828

INTRODUCTION A GUIDE TO THE RESILIENCE STRATEGY

A GUIDE TO THE RESILIENCE 
STRATEGY

Resilient Atlanta 
is divided into 
Visions, Targets, 
and Actions.

04 VISIONS
Aspirational view 
of the future that 
will lead to a 
resilient region.

16 TARGETS
Measured goals for 
tracking progress 
toward achieving 
the Visions.

57 ACTIONS
Policies, programs, or 
practices that the City and 
partners will implement to 
reach the Targets.

Action Page Overview

VISION LOCATION

ACTION NUMBER
Shown as Vision.Target.Action.

ACTION TITLE

RESILIENCE VALUE TO ATLANTANS 
The resilience values are described 
using icons to represent the 12 
drivers of the City Resilience 
Framework (see page 30). Each 
Action has a primary driver and up 
to two secondary drivers.

LEAD PARTNERS
List of the key implementation 
partners spearheading the actions. If 
interested in partnering, visit the Call 
to Action section of the Strategy.

POTENTIAL MEASURES OF 
SUCCESS
Quantitative ways to measure 
progress toward the goal, which can 
be measured on an annual basis.

ACTION SUMMARY
A description of the initiative in 
detail, including key partners and 
impact.

FUNDING
Listed on Actions that are partially 
funded or fully funded, along with 
the source of funding.

29

INTRODUCTION CITY RESILIENCE FRAMEWORK

City Resilience Framework

The City Resilience Framework (CRF) provides a lens to understand the complexity of cities and 
the drivers that contribute to their resilience, and a common language that enables cities to share 
knowledge and experiences. The CRF is built on four essential dimensions of urban resilience:

•  Health & Wellbeing: of everyone living and working in the city
•  Economy & Society: the social and financial systems that enable urban populations to live 

peacefully and act collectively
Infrastructure & Environment: the way in which man-made and natural infrastructure provide 
critical services and protects urban citizens

• 

•  Leadership & Strategy: effective leadership, empowered stakeholders, and integrated planning

MEETS BASIC NEEDS
Particularly in times of crisis, ensure that 
people have access the basic resources 
necessary to survive.

SUPPORTS LIVELIHOODS & 
EMPLOYMENT
Assist 
individuals  to  access  diverse 
livelihood and employment opportunities, 
including access to business investment 
and social welfare.

ENSURES PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICES
Provide  access  to  effective  public 
healthcare  and  emergency  services  to 
safeguard physical and mental health. 

PROVIDES & ENHANCES NATURAL 
AND MANMADE ASSETS
Maintain  protective  natural  and  man-
made  assets  that  reduce  the  physical 
vulnerability of city systems.

ENSURES CONTINUITY OF CRITICAL 
SERVICES
Actively manage and enhance natural 
and man-made resources. 

PROVIDES RELIABLE 
COMMUNICATION & MOBILITY
Provide a free flow of people, information, 
and goods.

PROMOTES COHESIVE & ENGAGED 
COMMUNITIES
Create a sense of collective identity and 
mutual support.

ENSURES SOCIAL STABILITY, 
SECURITY, & JUSTICE
Ensure  a  comprehensive  and  inclusive 
approach  to 
law  enforcement  and 
justice that fosters a stable, secure, and 
just society.

FOSTERS ECONOMIC PROSPERITY
Ensure the availability of funding and a 
vibrant economy as a result of diverse 
revenue streams, the ability to attract 
business  investment,  and  contingency 
plans. 

PROMOTES LEADERSHIP & EFFECTIVE 
MANAGEMENT
Encourage  capable  leadership  and 
effective urban management within 
government and civil society.

EMPOWERS A BROAD RANGE OF 
STAKEHOLDERS
Ensure  everybody 
capable, and involved in their city.

is  well 

informed, 

FOSTERS LONG TERM & INTEGRATED 
PLANNING
Align  sectoral  plans  and 
individual 
projects  with  the  city’s  vision  to  be 
coordinated and appropriate to address 
the city’s needs.

INTRODUCTION CITY RESILIENCE FRAMEWORK

Fosters Long-Term & 
Integrated  Planning

Meets Basic 

Needs

Empowers a Broad 
Range of Stakeholders

Supports Livelihoods 

& Employment

Promotes Leadership & 
Effective Management 

Ensures Public 
Health Services

LEADERSHIP & 

STRATEGY

HEALTH & 
WELLBEING

CRF DRIVERS

12 drivers reflect the actions cities can take 
to improve their resilience, and 50 subdrivers 
provide more detail about the scope of the 

driver.

INFRASTRUCTURE & 

ENVIRONMENT

ECONOMY & 

SOCIETY

Provides Reliable 
Communication 
& Mobility 

Promotes Cohesive & 
Engaged Communities

Ensures Continuity of 

Critical Services

Ensures Social Stability, 

Security, & Justice

Provides & Enhances 

Natural & 

Manmade Assets

Fosters Economic 

Prosperity

30

31

“

We become not a melting pot but a beautiful 
mosaic. Different people, different beliefs, 

different yearnings, different hopes, 

different dreams.

 

- - President Jimmy Carter

 “

01VISION

PRESERVE 
AND 
CELEBRATE 
WHO WE ARE

Preserve and enhance Metro 
Atlanta’s culture, shared identity, and 
history to build social cohesion and 
cultivate the creative economy.

Photo Credit:  Center for Civil and Human Rights.

32

33

VISION 01

PRESERVE AND CELEBRATE 
WHO WE ARE 

We envision a city in which we acknowledge the past and allow our residents to feel empowered 
to share their stories for the benefit of the community. With these Actions, Atlanta will become a 
national leader in addressing structural racism while at the same time commemorating our rich 
cultural assets.

Atlanta is a diverse and growing city. The culture of Atlanta has been influenced by a range of 
significant historical events from the Civil War, to Civil Rights, to the Olympic Games. The city and its 
residents have recognized some of these key movements and moments in time through dedicated 
cultural institutions and museums; traditional modes of cultural expression, such as sculptures, art, 
and performances; and memorial sites. However, these do not capture the full human experience 
of these events. Ensuring the city grows cohesively and equitably requires both a recognition and 
understanding of what the city’s culture has meant to residents over time, as told through personal 
stories, as well as an open conversation about what residents envision for the future identity of 
Atlanta. By embracing these stories, we in turn support our city’s creative economy -- from artists 
to musicians to philanthropists -- that bring these narratives to life and captivate our senses.
 

VISION 1 TARGET OVERVIEW

Vision 01:
Target Overview
TARGET 1.1

100%

BLACK

LATINO

ASIAN

WHITE

0%

80% of Black, 43% of Latino, 
and 29% of Asian children live 
in high poverty compared to 
only 6% of White children. 

TARGET 1.2 

Metro 
Atlanta 
is made 
of:

Neighborhoods 

242 
29 

Metro Counties

Become a national leader in addressing structural racism, 
reconciling historic racism, and promoting racial equity. 
The  City  will  work  to  become  a  leader  in  addressing  structural  racism, 
reconciling historic racism, and promoting racial equity. Home to the Civil 
Rights  Movement,  Atlanta  has  a  storied  past  in  confronting  structural 
racism,  which  continues  to  impact  the  lives  of  Metro  Atlantans.  Yet 
despite our storied past, there is strong evidence that indicates inequities 
still  perpetuate  along  racial  lines.  Only  6  percent  of White  children  live 
in  high  poverty  areas  compared  to  80  percent  of  Black,  43  percent  of 
Latino, and 29 percent of Asian children. Additionally, between 2009-2013, 
White households earned a median income of nearly $85,000; more than 
three times the median income for Black households ($26,605), followed 
by Latino ($43,141), and Asian/Pacific Islander ($57,172). Action 1.1.1 calls 
on the City to partner with existing organizations working in this realm 
to  host  race  forums  in  which  residents  will  come  together  to  discuss 
racism and advise the City on appropriate policies and actions to publicly 
recognize and reconcile the atrocities of the past. Under Action 1.1.2, to 
commemorate  the  50th  anniversary  of  the  assassination  of  Dr.  Martin 
Luther King, Jr., One Small Change and Civic Dinners will launch IMAGINE 
50/50, a community engagement campaign to discuss the long-standing 
barrier of race and racism and to envision strategies for a more equitable 
city.

Document and share the stories of Atlanta’s 242 neighborhoods 
and Metro Atlanta’s 29 counties.
Atlanta is in many respects a divided city and region, with neighborhoods 
to the south and west being home to a disproportionately higher number 
of vulnerable populations. A holistic understanding of the challenges faced 
by all residents is the first step in uniting the community. Actions 1.2.1 and 
1.2.2 focus on creating space for people to share their stories and discuss 
regional chronic stresses that impact the Metro Atlanta region. Utilizing 
the Civic Dinners platform and other digital media initiatives, residents will 
begin documenting and sharing the stories of Atlanta’s residents across 
all 242 neighborhoods and 29 Metro counties.

34

35
35

VISION 1 TARGET OVERVIEW

VISION 1 ACTION TIMELINE

TARGET 1.3
$6.0

 

l

 

 
c
i
s
u
m
d
n
a
m
fi
 
f
o
 
s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
C

y
m
o
n
o
c
e
 
s
’
a
t
n
a
l
t
A
o
t
 
s
e
i
r
t
s
u
d
n

 

i

B I L L I O N

F I L M

$3.7

B I L L I O N

M U S I C

Build Atlanta’s arts and culture sector to become one of the city’s 
fastest growing industries by 2025. 
Atlanta will build upon a rich history in arts and culture and leverage its 
strength in music, media, and film production to propel the city’s vibrant 
creative  sector  into  one  of  the  fastest  growing  sectors  by  2025.  The 
arts and cultural sectors already make a significant contribution to the 
economy, with film and TV productions alone generating $6 billion for the 
State in FY 2015 and a music industry that generates $3.7 billion annually.22 
Harnessing continued growth presents a huge opportunity for workforce 
development and cultural vibrancy. Action 1.3.1 explores new policies and 
practices to support the growth of the creative economy for years to come. 
Actions  1.3.2  and  1.3.3  provide  workforce  development  and  additional 
business growth opportunities for small- and mid-sized producers in the 
entertainment  space. These  entrepreneurs will  be  able  to  connect with 
production companies and access low-cost production materials in order 
to ease entry into the industry and create new employment opportunities 
for local talent.

Vision 01:
Action Launch Dates

2017

2018

ACTION 1.2.1
Elevate conversations about 
Metro Atlanta’s resilience by 
hosting 500 Civic Dinners by 
2025

 

ACTION 1.2.2
 Create a “People of 
Atlanta” Platform by 2020

Q3

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

ACTION 1.3.1
Create a comprehensive cultural 
plan for the City of Atlanta  

ACTION 1.3.3
Promote economic development 
in the arts and humanities 
sectors through a creative rescue 
and reuse program

ACTION 1.1.2
Launch IMAGINE 50/50 series to 
vision a racially equitable Metro 
Atlanta

ACTION 1.1.1
Create a formal City document 
and corresponding policies by 
2020 to recognize and reconcile 
past systemic wrongdoings

ACTION 1.3.2
Promote workforce development 
in the arts and humanities 
sectors

36

37

VISION 1 TARGET 1.1

VISION 1 TARGET 1.1

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Action 1.1.1: Create a formal City document and corresponding 
policies by 2020 to recognize and reconcile past systemic 
wrongdoings 
The City will partner with existing organizations 
leading work  in  race  relations  to  host  a  series 
of  race  and  reconciliation  forums  to  address 
structural  racism.  These  forums  will  inform  a 
formal City document and policies to recognize 
and  reconcile  the  atrocities  of  the  past.  The 
City  needs  to  take  the  lead  on  recognizing 
and reconciling a history full of racial inequity 
and  fostering 
  about 
social  differences  between  ethnically  diverse 
communities and individuals. In conjunction with 
each  event,  participants  will  also  participate 
in  non-violent  communication  training.  The 
forums, coupled with policies formally integrated 
throughout City government, will allow Atlanta 
to  serve  as  an  example  in  how  cities  can 
address the nature of racism using non-violent 
communication  techniques  amongst  citizens 
and government officials.

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of unique neighborhood forums held
•  # of attendees at forums
•  % of different demographics of attendees
• 

Lead Implementing Partners: 
CoA  Mayor’s Office Resilience, CoA Chief Equity 
Officer, local race-focused organizations 
and experts

Primary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & Engaged 
Communities
Secondary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders

Improved racial equity, noted through 
qualitative public surveys

  communication 

 

•  # of policy changes implemented that 

support racial equity 

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & Engaged 
Communities
Secondary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders

Action 1.1.2: Launch IMAGINE 50/50 series to vision a racially 
equitable Metro Atlanta 
IMAGINE  50/50,  a  series  of  50 
Launch 
collective visioning events imagining “what a 
racially  equitable  Metro  Atlanta  region  looks 
like  in  50  years.”  The  goal  is  to  offer  a  safe 
environment for Atlanta and the larger Metro 
region  to  engage  in  dialogue  to  address  the 
long-standing  barriers  of  race  and  racism 
today. IMAGINE 50/50 will kick off on April 4, 
2018, in collaboration with the Center for Civil 
and  Human  Rights,  The  Martin  Luther  King 
Center  for  Nonviolent  Social  Change,  and 
other  local  partners  to  commemorate  the 
50th anniversary of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.’s 
assassination. Each event will use the Chicago 
Dinner  event  model  to  gather  input  from  all 
sectors  of  our  community  to  operationalize 
and visualize a racially equitable Metro Atlanta 
region now and 50 years down the road. The 
visioning  events  will  be  completed  within 
one year and will be collected, archived, and 
compiled  to  create  an  Imagine  50/50 Vision 
Archive Book that will inform implementation 
of the visions by 2025.

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of attendees at events
•  % of different demographics of attendees
•  # of visions/initiatives implemented as result 

Lead Implementing Partners: 
Both And Partners, Inc., One Small Change, Inc., 
Civic Dinners 

•  # of unique neighborhoods in which forums 

•  # of policy changes implemented that 

support racial equity 

of events

are held

Mural by Fahamu Pecou for WonderRoot at King-Memorial 
MARTA Station. Photo Credit: Dustin Chambers

38

Martin Luther King Junior. Photo Credit: Adam Cuerden - U.S. 
National Archives and Records Administration

39

VISION 1 TARGET 1.2

VISION 1 TARGET 1.2

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Action 1.2.1: Elevate conversations about Metro Atlanta’s 
resilience by hosting 500 Civic Dinners by 2025 
Expand  the  Civic  Dinners  platform  to  facilitate  discussions 
about  regional  chronic  stresses  that  impact  Metro  Atlanta’s 
resilience,  such  as 
lack  of  transportation  and  mobility, 
education,  economic  prosperity,  LGBTQ  rights,  and  natural 
resource protection. The Civic Dinners model utilizes a simple 
structure, with 6-10 people gathering over a meal to discuss 
a  specific  topic  organized  by  a  volunteer  host  via  an  online 
platform.  The  host  follows  a  simple  guide  with  questions, 
allowing  everyone  equal  time  to  share  with  one  voice  at  a 
time. Civic Dinners is the first civic engagement platform to 
combine the power of food, conversation, and technology to 
scale  meaningful  conversations,  build  real  relationships,  and 
strengthen the civic and social infrastructure of neighborhoods 
and  communities  within  Atlanta.  Becoming  resilient  means 
re-envisioning our civic infrastructure: the stronger our social 
infrastructure and our neighborhood networks are, the greater 
the ability we will have to respond to urgent challenges in a 
timely  and  coordinated  manner.  In  order  to  create  real  and 
lasting change, everyone needs to be at the table.

Primary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & 
Engaged Communities
Secondary Driver
Empowers a Broad 
Range of Stakeholders

Potential Metrics/Measures of 
Success:
•  # of Civic Dinners
•  # of topics addressed at 

Lead Implementing Partners: 
Civic Dinners, Atlanta Regional 
Commission

•  # of attendees who turn into 

volunteers

dinners

•  % of different demographics 

of attendees

•  # of relationships formed, as 

measured by Civic Dinners 
platform, Facebook, or other 
social platform connections

Action 1.2.2: Create a “People of Atlanta” Platform by 2020

Document  weekly  short  stories  of  Atlanta 
residents both in everyday life, as well as before 
and  after  major  shocks.  The  initiative  would 
include  a  workforce  development  component 
by offering technical training and employment 
opportunities for young adults hired to support 
the  project.  The  People  of  Atlanta  initiative  
relies upon citizen journalism to create a living 
narrative  of  the  identity  and  culture  of  Metro 
Atlanta’s  diverse  population,  captured  by  the 
people  for  the  people. Various  forms  of  media 
would  be  used  to  capture  stories  to  allow  for 
maximum  participation  and  accessibility.  The 
stories will be compiled and published on social 
media networks and web pages and will present 
a  more  holistic  picture  of  Atlanta’s  resilience 
while enhancing social cohesion. The stories will 
put a face and a voice on true human resilience 
— Atlanta’s greatest asset. 

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & Engaged 
Communities
Secondary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders

Lead Implementing Partners: 
WonderRoot, Atlanta History Center

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of unique page views on website portal
•  # of likes and comments on social media 

sources

•  # of story requests received
•  % of different demographics of storytellers
•  # of youth trained and hired

Partner Spotlight

The Story of Atlanta 

The  Story  of  Atlanta,  a  component  of 
an  upcoming  City  of  Atlanta  Historic 
Revitalization  Strategy  launching  in  early 
2018, will be a multi-platform media narrative 
headed by the Department of City Planning. 
The initiative aims to connect today’s historic 
buildings, landmarks, and places to their past, 

and to inspire respect for and protection of 
the  historic  spaces  and  buildings  that  help 
tell the stories of Atlanta’s past. The stories 
produced will be shared via a variety of media 
platforms, including through a website, social 
media, and podcasts. 

41

A Civic Dinner in Atlanta. Photo 
Credit: Civic Dinners

40

VISION 1 TARGET 1.3

VISION 1 TARGET 1.3

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & Engaged 
Communities
Secondary Driver
Fosters Economic Prosperity
Secondary Driver
Fosters Long-Term & Integrated  
Planning

Action 1.3.1: Create a comprehensive cultural plan for the City 
of Atlanta
Create a cultural plan for the City of Atlanta that 
centers  on  municipal  support  for  the  creative 
economy through a focus on people, places, and 
policies within 12  months  of  the  release  of  the 
Strategy.  Arts  and  culture  play  an  important, 
yet  currently  undervalued,  economic  role  in 
attracting  residents,  employers,  and visitors  to 
the city, as well as improving the quality of life 
of  current  residents. The  creative  industry  also 
plays  a  critical  role  in  telling  the  story  of  the 
cultural identity of the city and creating public 
discourse about unity and diversity. The City of 
Atlanta  will  work  with  a  collaborative  team  of 
arts,  culture,  entertainment,  and  community 
stakeholders  to  define  the  scope  of  Atlanta’s 
creative  economy;  identify  ways  to  integrate 
arts and culture throughout municipal functions; 
and generate ideas for the creation, activation, 
and  preservation  of  cultural  space  and  assets. 
The  cultural  plan  will 
include  actionable 
steps,  recommendations  for  implementation, 
estimated  costs,  and  sustainable 
revenue 
sources  for  programs.  Development  of  the 
cultural plan by the City of Atlanta will kick off in 
November 2017. 

•  # of attendees at outreach events 
•  % of different demographics of attendees 
•  # of dedicated funding streams won due to 

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of outreach events conducted while 

Lead Implementing Partners: 
CoA Mayor’s Manager of Public Art

•  # of growing, healthy small- and mid-sized 

•  # of initiatives implemented as a result of 

arts organizations in the city  

creating the plan

the cultural plan

the plan

The Krog Street Tunnel along the Old Fourth Ward BeltLine. 
Photo Credit: Pana Vasquez

42

 

initiative 

improving  workforce 

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Primary Driver
Fosters Economic Prosperity

Secondary Driver
Supports Livelihoods & Employment
Secondary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & Engaged 
Communities

Lead Implementing Partners: 
CoA  Mayor’s Manager of Public Art, CoA Office 
of Film and Entertainment 
Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of creative economy workforce roundtables
•  $ of fundraising received due to roundtables
•  % different demographics of attendees
•  # of jobs created due to roundtables
•  # of board members gained due to roundtables

Action 1.3.2: Promote workforce development in the arts and 
humanities sectors
Develop  a  creative  economy  workforce 
that 
development 
focuses 
on 
resilience  and 
encouraging professional development within 
the  creative  community  by 2022. The  goal  is 
to create a platform to better match under-
resourced small- and mid-sized arts and culture 
organizations  with  larger  arts  organizations, 
TV and film industry executives, funders, and 
other  stakeholders.  Quarterly  round  table 
discussions  will  bring  these  groups  together 
and  provide  a  mechanism  for  organizations 
to 
identify  funding  opportunities,  recruit 
potential  board  members,  and  tap 
into 
employment opportunities across art, film, TV, 
and  music  industries.  This  platform  will  also 
give  larger  organizations  the  chance  to  plug 
into  a  talented  pool  of  professional  artists 
and  stay  abreast  of  the  latest  developments 
in  popular  culture,  technology,  and  the  local 
cultural community. 
Action 1.3.3: Promote economic development in the arts and 
humanities sectors through a creative rescue and reuse program
Establish a creative reuse program that focuses 
on  encouraging  material  reuse  in  Atlanta’s 
creative economy by 2022. Beginning in 2018, 
the City of Atlanta Mayor’s Manager of Public 
Art  will  identify  an  appropriate  nonprofit 
partner to lead the development of a material 
depot  and  home  base  for  the  creative  reuse 
program. The organization will provide space 
that  will  accept  donated  craft  supplies  such 
as props and other production materials from 
production  companies  that  have  completed 
creative projects in Metro Atlanta, which can 
then be purchased at significantly lower prices 
by  schools,  nonprofits,  and  individuals  with 
limited  resources  to  go  towards  productions, 
craft  classes,  and  workshops.  This  resource 
sharing  program  not  only  will  help  smaller, 
resource-strapped 
organizations 
grow  and  thrive  economically  but  will  also 
improve citywide sustainability efforts through 
decreased waste. 

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of items donated per month
•  # and types of donors 
•  # and types of recipients  
•  # of pounds of waste diverted through the 

Lead Implementing Partners: 
CoA Mayor’s Manager of Public Art, CoA Office 
of Film and Entertainment 

Primary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & Engaged 
Communities

Secondary Driver
Supports Livelihoods & Employment

Secondary Driver
Fosters Economic Prosperity

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

program

creative 

43

VISION 1 SHARED INSPIRATION

VISION 1: 
SHARED INSPIRATION 
FROM THE 100RC 
GLOBAL NETWORK

ACTION 1.3.1:
Boulder is engaging the creative 
power of the arts to convey and 
involve people in complex risk and 
resilience themes.

ACTION 1.1.1: 
Berkeley is developing a City of 
Berkeley Racial Equity Action Plan 
and creating a multi-departmental 
City Advancing Racial Equity Team.

ACTION 1.1.1: 
New Orleans uses the Welcome 
Table to bring together diverse 
groups of New Orleanians to work 
toward racial reconciliation. 

Action 1.1.2: 
Boston is launching the Racism, 
Equity, and Leadership (REAL) 
Resilience Program to incorporate 
resilience and racial equity into City 
policies and processes.

VISION 1 SHARED INSPIRATION

ACTION 1.3.2: 
Semarang is enhancing 
the capacity of the 
creative economy, 
especially for businesses 
that focus on the 
specialties in Semarang. 

 ACTION 1.1.2: 
Medellín encourages citizen coexistence 
through the communication of the 
principles of coexistence in the 16 
comunas and five districts of Medellín.

ACTION 1.2.2: 
Medellín is producing a mini 
documentary series with five chapters 
and a summary, which will tell Medellín’s 
story of demographic transformation.

44

ACTION 1.3.1: 
Porto Alegre is identifying the business model, 
stakeholders, and productive networks formed 
in and around the creative economy to envisage 
ways to develop public policies for the 
creative sector.

ACTION 1.3.2: 
Rio de Janeiro is promoting equal 
access to culture encouraging the 
symbolic, economic, and social 
mobility of Carioca cultural agents.

ACTION 1.2.1: 
Christchurch is developing community 
events and local information resources to 
help new residents build connections with 
people in their immediate communities.

45

“

No nation as rich as ours should have so many 
people isolated on islands of poverty in such 

a sea of material wealth.

- Ambassador Andrew Young

 “

VISION

02

ENABLE 
ALL METRO 
ATLANTANS 
TO PROSPER

Reduce the barriers preventing 
Atlantans from achieving economic 
stability and security to increase 
access to opportunity and move 
Atlanta out of the nation’s top 10 
cities ranked for income inequality. 

A young boy has his shoes tied by his mom. 
Photo Credit: Mr.Carmichae1 

46
46

47
47

VISION 02

ENABLE ALL METRO 
ATLANTANS TO PROSPER 

We envision a city in which all Atlantans have equal and equitable access to the resources, education, 
livable wages, and beyond-income-earning opportunities that will prepare them for success. With 
these Actions, Metro Atlanta will build capacity among its residents, business owners, and employees 
through better education and workforce development to become a region that supports economic 
mobility and intergenerational wealth building. 

Despite Atlanta’s position as one of the fastest growing regions in the U.S., it remains one of the 
worst in terms of economic mobility. As a result of discriminatory systems and policies, lower-income 
households throughout Metro Atlanta have an increasingly difficult time rising to higher income 
distributions. Improving access to quality education, workforce development, and other business 
development-support programs will put Atlanta on the path to achieving this goal.
.

VISION 2 TARGET OVERVIEW

Vision 02:
Target Overview
TARGET 2.1

DIN G

A
E
R

40%

3RD
G R A D E

Prepare 100 percent of Metro Atlanta’s children for kindergarten. 
The  City  of Atlanta will work with  the  State  and  local  organizations  to 
prepare 100 percent of Metro Atlanta’s children for kindergarten.  Atlanta’s 
school  system  today  struggles  to  meet  the  needs  of  K-12  students. 
According  to  Learn4Life,  only  40  percent  of  children  were  proficient  in 
reading by the end of third grade, and only 38 percent of children were 
proficient in math by the end of eighth grade in 2014-2015. High-quality 
Pre-K and early learning programs that are accessible for all, and other 
initiatives that work to prepare children for kindergarten, will provide a 
strong  foundation  critical  for  future  educational  achievement  and  for 
cultivating an educated workforce. Action 2.1.1 expands the framework 
for  free  Pre-K  programs  across  Metro  Atlanta  while  Action  2.1.2  works 
to  further  expand  additional  kindergarten  preparedness  initiatives  to 
improve literacy outcomes. 

TARGET 2.2

T E

I

H

W

5%

BLA

C

K

19%

2015

UNEMPLOYMENT

N
A
I
S
A

6%

O

N

I

T

8%

A

L

Connect 10,000 Metro Atlantans to at least 10,000 new livable 
wage jobs by 2020. 
The City of Atlanta will work with partner organizations to connect 10,000 
Metro Atlantans to 10,000 new jobs by 2020. Underserved and minority 
populations,  especially  youth  and  previously  incarcerated  individuals, 
face  additional  challenges  finding  work.  For  example,  as  of  2015  the 
unemployment  rate  among  Whites  was  4.6  percent  compared  to 19.4 
percent among Blacks, 5.9 percent among Asians, and 8.2 percent among 
those of Latino/Hispanic origin. Action 2.2.1 establishes a revolving loan 
fund that will provide local small film, music and digital entertainment 
businesses  and  individuals  with  seed  money  to  support  workforce 
development  and  business  growth.  Action  2.2.2  calls  for  increasing 
employment opportunities for high school students through the Mayor’s 
Summer  Youth  Program.  Action  2.2.3  expands  existing  workforce  re-
entry  programs  for  previously  incarcerated  young  adults.  Action  2.2.4 
streamlines communication between workforce placement organizations 
and City contractors by creating a permanent liaison position within the 
City.

48

49

VISION 2 TARGET OVERVIEW

VISION 2 ACTION TIMELINE

TARGET 2.3

OFFICE RENT INCREASE

90% NEAR BELTLINE 

OVER
20%

ACROSS ATLANTA

Expand Career Choice in Metro Atlanta. 
The City will work with partner organizations to reduce barriers to high-
demand  career  pathways  and  jobs  of  choice.  Many  workers  who  start 
their career in their profession of choice, such as safety personnel, creative 
makers, and small business entrepreneurs, can face significant trade-offs 
that relate to the nature of the job, such as nontraditional work hours 
and  high  cost  of  maker  machinery  and workspace.  Furthermore, while 
office rents across Atlanta have increased by over 20 percent since 2000, 
office rents along the BeltLine Westside and Eastside trails have increased 
by  more  than  90  percent.25  The  City  seeks  to  reduce  these  barriers 
to  the  extent  possible  to  support  job  growth.  Action  2.3.1  develops  a 
set  of  programmatic  and  policy  solutions  to  support  Black  business 
entrepreneurs. Action 2.3.2 works to create more affordable maker-space 
in developing neighborhoods to prevent displacement of these types of 
workspaces. Action 2.3.3 brings together public and private stakeholders 
to expand and improve affordable high-quality child care centers. 2.3.4 
supports  the  growth  of  flexible  childcare  centers  to  align  with  safety 
personnel hours and allow them to maintain their position if they have 
children.

50

Vision 02:
Action Launch Dates

2017

ACTION 2.2.1 
Establish a multi-billion dollar 
Creative Industries Revolving 
Loan Fund to support and retain 
local film and music talent

2018

ACTION 2.2.3
Expand the capacity of 
Workforce Re-Entry Programs for 
previously incarcerated young 
adults by at least 25 percent

ACTION 2.2.2
Revitalize the Mayor’s Youth 
Scholarship Program summer 
employment component 
and provide employment 
opportunities to at least 5,000 
high school students by 2020

2019

ACTION 2.1.1 
Support Georgia’s Universal 
Pre-K Program for all 4-year-
olds by reducing the number of 
children on Pre-K waiting lists in 
high-need areas

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

ACTION 2.3.1
Establish the Advancing 
Collective Prosperity through 
Entrepreneurship Initiative

ACTION 2.3.2
Establish a $1 million fund 
and implement a program to 
maintain affordability of small 
business and maker rental 
space along newly developing 
BeltLine corridors

ACTION 2.1.2
Expand the capacity of 
Learn4Life early childhood 
initiatives

ACTION 2.2.4
Fund a permanent, full-time 
First Source outreach liaison at 
WorkSource Atlanta

ACTION 2.3.3
Increase access to affordable, 
high-quality child care programs 
for infants and toddlers in Metro 
Atlanta through policy, regulation; 
and new funding options for 
subsidies and scholarships

ACTION 2.3.4
Establish a child and dependent 
care program for the City’s safety 
personnel

51
51

VISION 2 TARGET 2.1

VISION 2 TARGET 2.1

Resilience Value to 
Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Empowers a Broad 
Range of Stakeholders
Secondary Driver
Supports Livelihoods 
& Employment
Secondary Driver
Fosters Long-Term & 
Integrated  Planning

Action 2.1.1: Support Georgia’s Universal Pre-K Program for all 
four-year-olds by reducing the number of children on Pre-K 
waiting lists in high-need areas 
Convene  partners  and  garner  support  from  State  and  local 
funders  to  ensure  that  all  four-year-olds  across  Metro Atlanta 
applying for Pre-K are guaranteed a slot in a qualified program 
by 2020. In 2011, the state Legislature funded a series of studies 
of Georgia’s Pre-K program, including a longitudinal study that 
followed children through their third grade year. The most recent 
results  highlighted  outcomes  through  first  grade  and  found 
that children who attended Pre-K made significant gains across 
language, literacy, math, and social skills, progressing at a greater 
rate  than  what  would  be  expected  for  typical  development 
through first grade. Universal Pre-K promotes diverse classrooms, 
benefits children of all socioeconomic backgrounds, and typically 
draws  broad  political  support.  Georgia’s  lottery  funded  Pre-K 
program is accessible to any age-eligible child residing in Georgia 
regardless  of  family  income.  The  program  operates  through  a 
public-private partnership, offering Pre-K in local school systems, 
private for-profit and nonprofit child care centers, military bases, 
colleges and universities, and other facilities, provided that slots 
are available. The number of lottery funded Georgia Pre-K slots 
is  limited  due  to  space  and  financial  limitations.  As  a  result, 
some  Georgia  Pre-K  programs  have  waiting  lists  with  children 
selected  by  a  lottery.  Expansion  of  the  current  Pre-K  program 
to  accommodate  all  four-year-olds  in  Metro  Atlanta,  with  a 
focus  on  low-income  communities,  will  involve  reviewing  data 
to identify where demand for Pre-K is the greatest. Additionally, 
expansion will require collaboratively working with public schools, 
eligible child care centers, and early learning programs to address 
barriers to adding slots, including expanding funding at the state 
and local level.

Lead Implementing 
Partners:
Georgia Early Education 
Alliance for Ready Students 
(GEEARS),Bright from  
the Start, Quality Care for 
Children, Regional public 
school systems

Potential Metrics/Measures 
of Success:
•  % increase in enrollment 
of low income students 
in Metro Atlanta Pre-K 
programs 

•  % increase in number of 
slots available to Metro 
Atlanta Pre-K students

A young boy playing with his mom. 
Photo Credit: Mr.Carmichae1 

52

Primary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Action 2.1.2: Expand the capacity of Learn4Life early 
childhood initiatives
Partner with Learn4Life (L4L), the Metro Atlanta 
Regional Education Partnership, to support the 
implementation  and  expansion  of  programs 
their  cross-functional  group  of  leaders  have 
identified  to  improve  kindergarten  readiness 
and 3rd Grade literacy in Metro Atlanta by 2020. 
The  three  strategies  their  group  has  selected 
to scale are: Reach Out and Read, Read Right 
from the Start, and Vision To Learn. Reach Out 
and  Read  partners  with  pediatricians  to  offer 
Metro Atlanta parents of children through age 
five,  ten  books  by  their  child’s  fifth  birthday, 
and facilitates at least ten engagements with 
parents  on  the  importance  of  reading.  Read 
Right  from  the  Start  seeks  to  improve  Metro 
Atlanta literacy outcomes by offering teachers 
cutting  edge,  proven 
strategies 
available online at no charge. Vision To Learn is 
a successful nonprofit that provides eye exams 
and glasses to students free of charge.

grade level

literacy 

Lead Implementing Partners:
Learn4Life
 
Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  % of 3rd graders reading proficiently on 

Secondary Driver
Supports Livelihoods & Employment

Secondary Driver
Fosters Economic Prosperity

•  # of families served
•  # of books distributed
•  # of teachers trained
•  # of unique hits on online tools
•  # of eye exams provided

Funding: Funded; Metro Atlanta Chamber of 
Commerce, United Way of Greater Atlanta, 
Community Foundation for Greater Atlanta, 
Atlanta Regional Commission

Partner Spotlight

Hands On Atlanta 
Hands  on  Atlanta  connects  volunteers 
to  nonprofit  organizations  and  schools  in 
need,  while  engaging  socially  responsible 
companies  to  make  a  difference  in  their 
communities.  Backed  by  Georgia’s  second 
largest class of AmeriCorps members, Hands 
On Atlanta is committed to improving youth 
education  across  the  Metro  area.  Program 
staples 
like  Discovery  (Saturday  STEM 
classes)  and  Meals  4  Kids  (backpack  of 

weekend meals) highlight these initiatives 
to  connect  volunteers  to  opportunities  in 
the  community.  The  organization  began 
almost  30  years  ago  as  a  12-person 
group  dedicated  to  creating  a  flexible 
business  model  for  volunteering,  and  has 
grown  into  one  of  the  largest  volunteer 
coordinating  agencies  in  the  Southeast. 
Since the organization’s conception in 1989, 
volunteers  in  Atlanta  have  worked  more 
than six million hours. For more information 
visit www.handsonatlanta.org.

53

VISION 2 TARGET 2.2

VISION 2 TARGET 2.2

Secondary Driver
Fosters Economic Prosperity

Resilience Value to  Atlantans:
 

Primary Driver
Supports Livelihoods & 
Employment

Action 2.2.1: Establish a $5 million dollar Creative Industries 
Revolving Loan Fund to support and retain local film and 
music talent
Establish  a  Creative  Industries  Revolving  Loan  Fund  to 
provide  seed  funding  for  Atlanta-based  film,  music,  and 
digital  entertainment  entrepreneurs  that  do  not  currently 
qualify for the Film, Television, and Digital Entertainment Tax 
Credit. This funding will help entrepreneurs create, produce, 
and distribute their products, targeting nontraditional small 
businesses and individuals with production, post-production, 
and scaling work. As a major entertainment hub, Atlanta 
is home to thousands of small-scale content creators and 
attracts over 10,000 students studying film, music, media, 
and digital entertainment. Access to a dedicated revenue 
stream would enable local talent to benefit from Georgia’s 
lucrative film, music, and entertainment industries through 
workforce development and economic growth opportunities 
beyond working for major production houses. As opposed 
to  the  State  tax  credit,  which  attracts  a  steady  stream 
of  production  for  the  industry  from  established,  out-of-
state  producers,  this  fund  would  provide  critical  capital 
needed for small-scale, local producers to start or grow a 
film, music, or digital entertainment production. The fund 
would  be  created  in  late  2017/early  2018,  be  managed 
by  a  partnership  between  the  Mayor’s  Office  of  Film  and 
Entertainment  and  Invest  Atlanta,  and  will  provide  low-
interest loans with flexible repayment terms to local talent 
for  production,  post-production,  distribution,  marketing, 
touring, prototype and product development, and sales of 
their creative product.

Lead Implementing Partners:
CoA Mayor’s Office of Film and 
Entertainment, CoA Mayor’s Office 
of International Affairs, Invest 
Atlanta, Metro Atlanta Chamber, 
ChooseATL
Potential Metrics/Measures of 
Success:
•  # of metro Atlanta-based 

•  # of local production and post-
production full time equivalent 
(FTE) jobs

provided to creative talent in 
Atlanta

•  # of local production and post-

•  # of and $ amount of loans 

production firms

productions

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Action 2.2.2: Revitalize the Mayor’s Youth Scholarship Program 
summer employment component and provide employment 
opportunities to at least 5,000 high school students
Expand  the  Mayor’s  eight-week  Summer  Youth 
Program from a focus solely on scholarships to include 
summer employment by providing additional hiring 
opportunities,  exposure  to  careers  in  technology, 
and access to financial literacy courses for Atlanta’s 
high school youth, starting in 2018. Established under 
Mayor Shirley Franklin, the Mayor’s Youth Scholarship 
Program  was  created  to  ensure  that  unmet  needs 
associated with the cost of college are not a barrier 
to Atlanta Public School’s (APS) high school students 
who seek a higher education. Administered through 
WorkSource Atlanta, the program previously included 
an  eight-week  summer  employment  component 
open  to  all  APS  high  school  students  on  a  first-
come,  first-serve  basis.  Revitalizing  the  summer 
employment  component  of  the  program  and 
providing  employment  opportunities  to  5,000  high 
school  students  each  summer will  provide valuable 
career  and  economic  opportunities  for  Atlanta’s 
youth, especially Black youth.

Lead Implementing Partners:
WorkSource Atlanta, CoA  Office of 
Constituent Services, CoA Mayor’s Office
Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of new summer jobs available
•  # of APS high school students hired for 

Primary Driver
Supports Livelihoods & 
Employment
Secondary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders

•  # and types of organizations providing 

summer employment opportunities

a summer job

A concert audience member performing at the 2017 One 
Music Fest. Photo Credit: Mr.Carmichae1

54

Photo credit: Asiseeit

55
55

VISION 2 TARGET 2.2

VISION 2 TARGET 2.2

Primary Driver
Supports Livelihoods & Employment

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Action 2.2.4: Fund a permanent, full-time First Source 
outreach liaison at WorkSource Atlanta
Support  WorkSource  Atlanta  to  become  a 
convener  for  regional  WorkSource  offices  and 
community  partners.   As  a  regional  convener, 
WorkSource  Atlanta  will  transform  the  City’s 
local hiring initiative, First Source, into a more 
robust  program  with  improved  pipelines  to 
permanent employment and an increased pool 
of  quality  candidates  for  employers.  The  goal 
of the First Source program is to fill 50 percent 
of entry-level jobs for eligible city construction 
projects  with  local  hires  that  receive  training 
and  support  from  WorkSource  Atlanta.  The 
program  has  successfully  built  partnerships 
with  other  employment  service  organizations 
in  the  short-term  with  the  added  support  of 
an outreach liaison; however the position was 
only  approved  on  a  temporary  basis. The  City 
of Atlanta will commit to funding a permanent, 
full-time  liaison  at  WorkSource  charged  with 
forging  and  maintaining  partnerships  with 
front-line community initiatives to complement 
and enhance workforce training and outreach 
in 2018 and beyond. 

Secondary Driver
Fosters Economic Prosperity

      two years

Lead Implementing Partners:
WorkSource Atlanta, CoA Mayor’s Office

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of First Source program participants, both 

in terms of businesses and job seekers

•  # of First Source job seekers placed in jobs
•  # of successfully placed participants still on 

the job after six months, one year, and 

and permanent employment

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Primary Driver
Supports Livelihoods & Employment

Secondary Driver
Ensures Social Stability, Security, 
& Justice

Lead Implementing Partners:
Urban League of Greater Atlanta, The Come 
Up Project

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of participants trained
•  # of participants that receive internships 

Action 2.2.3: Expand the capacity of workforce re-entry 
programs for previously incarcerated young adults by at least 
25 percent
Provide  technical  assistance,  resources,  and 
organizational  support  to  continue  and  scale 
up  two    Urban  League  of  Greater  Atlanta’s 
re-entry  programs:  Training  to  Work  2  and  
Urban  Youth  Empowerment  Program-RISE  as 
well  as  The  Come  Up  Project’s  Gangstas  to 
Growers program to jointly place 250 previously 
incarcerated 
individuals  and  at-risk  youth 
in  stable  jobs  each  year.  Lack  of  economic 
opportunity  is  a  common  challenge  for  many 
urban communities which have been affected 
by  decades  of  divestment,  exploitation,  and 
neglect  often  resulting  in  increases  in  crime. 
These  conditions  disproportionately  affect 
people  of  color.  In  2015,  two-thirds  of  male 
inmates  in  Georgia  state  prisons  were  Black, 
despite living in a state where only 31 percent 
of the population identifies as Black. According 
to the Georgia Department of Juvenile Justice, 
Black youth make up over 70 percent of total 
admissions  for  criminal  offenses.  Furthermore, 
the state recidivism rate is among the highest 
in  the  nation  at  65  percent  for  youth  and  27 
percent for adults. Two separate studies funded 
by the National Institute of Justice found that 
a criminal record reduces the likelihood of a job 
callback or offer by 50 percent. Training to Work 
2  and    Urban  Youth  Empowerment  Program-
RISE help participants receive GED or vocational 
education training and credentials that lead to 
sustainable employment in high-demand fields 
with significant opportunity for employment as 
well  as  access  to  legal  advisors  and  mentors. 
Gangstas to Growers provides paid internships 
for at-risk youth and formerly incarcerated young 
adults at local farms. Together, continuation and 
expansion  of  these  programs will  help Atlanta 
lead  the  way  in  addressing  youth  and  young 
adult  offender  recidivism,unemployment,  and 
reductions  in  wealth  disparities.  The  Mayor’s 
Office  of  Resilience  will  advocate  for  funding 
and  technical  resources  to  support  all  three 
programs in building capacity to grow at a rate 
of at least 25 percent each year for 3-5 years.

•  Employment retention rate
•  $ increase in hourly wages
•  Recidivism rate for participants
•  Crime rates 
•  % of prisoners in counties served 
• 
•  $ increase in funding for initiatives

Funding: Partially Funded; US Department of 
Labor, Food Well Alliance

that are Black 

56

A construction worker building the Atlanta Police Foundation’s 
@Promise Youth Center. Photo credit: Mr.Carmichae1

57

VISION 2 TARGET 2.3

VISION 2 TARGET 2.3

Secondary Driver
Fosters Economic Prosperity

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Lead Implementing Partners:
Community of Practice

Primary Driver
Supports Livelihoods & 
Employment

Action 2.3.1: Establish the Advancing Collective Prosperity 
through Entrepreneurship Initiative
Support the launch of the Advancing Collective Prosperity 
through  Entrepreneurship  initiative  and  explore  policy 
reform  to  the  City’s  small  business  approval  process  to 
better  support  entrepreneurs.  In  May  2017,  the  Annie  E. 
Casey Foundation and The Kendeda Fund in collaboration 
with  Prosperity  Now,  convened  a  Community  of  Practice 
with  organizations  across  Atlanta  to  develop  a  set  of 
programmatic and policy solutions that serve to reimagine 
Black-owned  enterprises  as  generators  of  individual  and 
community wealth. With  a  focus  on  Black  entrepreneurs, 
the  goal  of  the  Community  of  Practice  is  to  ensure  that 
1,000 entrepreneurs are financially stable and contributing 
to  community  wealth.  More  specifically,  the  initiative 
will    provide  technical  assistance,  training,  and  access  to 
markets and networks to support 900 Black-owned firms 
that  are  owner-only  and  encourage  them  to    hire  one 
additional  employee.  Additionally,  100  Black-owned  firms 
with more than one employee will be encouraged to hire 
an  additional  employee  and/or  offer  livable  wages  and 
benefits  to  existing  employees.  Currently  96  percent  of 
Black  businesses  in  the  City  of  Atlanta  are  without  paid 
employees. Furthermore, the mean annual value in receipts 
and/or sales for Black businesses is $58,085 compared to 
White  businesses  at  $658,264.  Systemic  barriers  thwart 
Black  business  owners  access  to  capital  and  growing 
market opportunities. Georgia is also one of only two states 
that has a minimum wage well below the Federal minimum 
wage. Coupled together, these conditions perpetuate the 
growing wealth gap in Metro Atlanta that disportionately 
affects the Black population. The Community of Practice is 
on track to finalize details of the program and begin serving 
the first cohort of entrepreneurs in early 2018.

Potential Metrics/Measures of 
Success:
•  # of jobs created
• 
Increase in Black employment
•  # of businesses participating
• 

Increase in hourly wages for 
employees and yearly salary    
for employers

•  Job retention rate
• 

Funding: Partially Funded; 
Annie E. Casey Foundation and                  
The Kendeda Fund

Increased financial capability for 
participating entrepreneurs

Action 2.3.2: Establish a $1 million fund and implement a 
program to maintain affordability of small business and 
maker rental space along newly developing BeltLine corridors

Develop and implement a program to support 
existing  small  businesses,  and  catalyze  new 
small business development within the Atlanta 
BeltLine  Tax  Allocation  District,  to  promote 
community cohesion and job growth. Currently, 
small businesses and makers occupy a significant 
portion of the office and industrial space along 
the Atlanta BeltLine and are a critical part of the 
local community and economy. However, rising 
rents  resulting  from  redevelopment  activity, 
threaten not only businesses’ ability to stay in 
their  communities  but  also  the  affordability 
of the neighborhood, as these businesses may 
offer  goods  and  services  at  reasonable  rates. 
This  program  would  establish  and  oversee  an 
investment fund to purchase real estate along 
the Atlanta BeltLine that would provide shared 
workspace  and  pooled  resource  opportunities 
for small business. An initial pilot will launch in 
2018 and will focus on the Lee Street and Murphy 
Avenue  commercial  corridor  adjacent  to  the 
Atlanta  BeltLine’s  Westside  Trail  in  southwest 
Atlanta.

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Primary Driver
Supports Livelihoods & Employment

Secondary Driver
Ensures Social Stability, Security, 
& Justice

Lead Implementing Partners:
Atlanta BeltLine, Inc., CoA Mayor’s Office 
of Resilience

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  $ of funds invested in community
•  # of businesses supported or retained
•  # of new business attracted
•  $ of new private investment within 

a defined geography as the result of           
this program

Funding: Partially Funded; Atlanta BeltLine, Inc.

Switchyards Downtown Club. 
Photo Credit: Allie Miller

58

Photo Credit: Ian Schneider

5959

PARTNER FEATURE BELTLINE INITIATIVES

PARTNER FEATURE:
BELTLINE INITIATIVES

Born  out  of  Ryan  Gravel’s  1999  Master’s  thesis  at  the  Georgia  Institute  of 
Technology, the Atlanta BeltLine has been heralded as the most comprehensive 
transportation and economic development undertaking, not only in Atlanta, 
but perhaps the country or even the world. 

The Atlanta BeltLine seeks to connect Atlanta’s 45 intown neighborhoods via 
a 22-mile loop. With four sections of the BeltLine trail currently open, it will 
continue to open in phases through 2030. When complete, the planned loop 
will include 22 miles of modern streetcar, 33 miles of multi-use trail, and 2,000 
acres of parks. 

Former Mayor Shirley Franklin created the Atlanta BeltLine Partnership in 2005 
to garner support for the Atlanta BeltLine from both the public and private 
sectors. In 2006, Atlanta BeltLine, Inc., a quasi-government organization, was 
formed to oversee the implementation of the Atlanta BeltLine. To date, the 
Atlanta BeltLine has received $447 million of public and private investment. 

Since its inception, the Atlanta BeltLine has been committed to identifying and 
preserving community assets while designing and implementing sustainable 
infrastructure within and along the corridor. In 2010, Atlanta BeltLine created 
the Sustainable Design Typologies that establish design principles to guide the 
design  and  implementation  of  the  transit  and  trail  corridor. The Typologies 
address principles for energy and climate, water efficiency and quality, soil and 
habitat quality, green materials, design and construction, green operations 
and maintenance, community health, and access and equity. This Framework 
is realized in brownfield remediation, enhancing infrastructure of parks and 
historic buildings, installing solar power and low-energy fixtures, and promoting 
greener demolition to reduce the impacts of climate change.

The Atlanta BeltLine has made great efforts to partner with City of Atlanta 
Mayor’s Office of Resilience to integrate sustainability into BeltLine projects. 
Currently, Atlanta BeltLine, Inc., is the lead partner on the construction of the 

60

PARTNER FEATURE BELTLINE INITIATIVES

Proctor  Creek  Greenway,  a  major  greenspace  and  trailway  initiative  which 
broke ground in August of 2017. In addition to the projects listed below, the 
Atlanta BeltLine, Inc., will partner with the Mayor’s Office of Resilience Urban 
Agriculture Director to spearhead the development of 7-8 additional urban 
farm sites along the trail, which is critical to the Action 3.3.1 on creating a 
resilient local food system. 

Highlights: 

Solar Shed
Aluma  Farm, 
the  BeltLine’s  first  urban 
agriculture  site,  opened  in  December  2014. 
The  3.8  acre  site  has  been  transformed  from 
two  contaminated  industrial  sites  plagued  by 
erosion and soil depletion into a model privately 
operated  organic  food  production  site,  which 
sells locally grown produce to the community. In 
partnership with the Mayor’s Office of Resilience 
and  Georgia  Solar  Rebate  Program,  Atlanta 
BeltLine,  Inc.  will  install  a  farm  shed  with  a 
solar  panel  array  in  late 2017. The  shed will  be 
constructed with reclaimed or recycled building 
materials. The panel is expected to generate 2.8 
kilowatts and allow the farm to go “off the grid,” 
no  longer  pulling  from  the  public  utility.  The 
design for the shed also incorporates water and 
sewer  efficiency  measures,  including  a    water 
well, composting toilet, and rainwater collection 
for supplemental irrigation. 

Neighborhood Electric Vehicles 
The  Mayor’s  Office  of  Resilience  worked  with 
Department  of  Finance,  Department  of  Parks 
and  Recreation,  Atlanta  Police  Department, 
Department of Fleet Services, and Atlanta Fire 
Rescue Department to identify and secure the 
funding to purchase five Neighborhood Electric 
Vehicles (NEVs) for the City of Atlanta. Two of 
these cars are dedicated for the Atlanta Police 
Department, two are dedicated to the Atlanta 
Fire  Rescue  Department,  and  one  is  dedicated 
to the Department of Parks and Recreation. The 
size  and  efficiency  of  these  vehicles  will  allow 
first responders to navigate the Atlanta BeltLine 
corridor in a timely fashion. Additionally, because 
the  vehicles  are  one  hundred  percent  electric, 

they produce zero carbon emissions, which allows 
City of Atlanta departments working along the 
Atlanta BeltLine to reduce carbon emissions and 
help the City achieve its goal of reducing vehicle 
emissions 20 percent by the year 2020.

Pollinator Habitats 
The  Atlanta  BeltLine  represents  a  unique 
opportunity  to  cultivate  miles  of  connected 
habitat  for  pollinator  species  in  Atlanta.  The 
City recently passed a resolution to become an 
official affiliate of Bee City USA, endorsing a set 
of  commitments  to  ensure  stable  habitats  for 
pollinators.  Trees  Atlanta,  a  community-based 
nonprofit,  has  planted 19  acres  of  native  trees 
and grasses along the Atlanta BeltLine corridor 
and has developed an agreement with the City 
to  use  sustainable 
land-care  management 
practices in these areas. These practices include 
utilizing goats to remove invasive species, such 
as  kudzu,  instead  of  herbicides  and  restricting 
mowing  to  once  a year  along  the  path. These 
plants and practices allow for the development 
of biodiverse meadows along the path. A study 
conducted  by  Emory  University  found  three 
times  as  many  species  of  bees  and  five  times 
the number of bees in pollinator areas along the 
BeltLine than in mowed, manicured greenspaces 
(Moen, 2017).32 

For more information, please visit: 
www.beltline.org 

Eastside BeltLine Trail.  Photo Credit: John Becker

61
61

VISION 2 TARGET 2.3

VISION 2 TARGET 2.3

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Supports Livelihoods & Employment

Secondary Driver
Ensures Social Stability, Security, 
& Justice

Action 2.3.4: Establish a child and dependent care program 
for the City’s safety personnel
Establish a child and dependent care program 
by  2020  to  ensure  City  of  Atlanta  Safety 
Personnel (Police, Fire Rescue, and Corrections) 
have  access  to  quality,  affordable  child  care 
and  dependent  care  that  accommodates 
extended shifts and alternative work schedules. 
The City will work with partners to ensure there 
is an adequate number of child care providers 
offering services for alternative schedule workers 
and  explore  funding  opportunities  to  support 
child  care  subsidies.  Public  safety  personnel 
work outside of the typical 40-hour core work 
week, frequently working in excess of 50 hours a 
week, in 12-24 hour shifts or are on-call, making 
it  difficult  for  parents  to  maintain  a  work-life 
balance.  Many  safety  personnel,  especially 
women and/or single-parents, opt to transition 
out  of  careers  in  public  safety,  compromising 
diversity  and  equity  among  our 
safety 
personnel. There are almost 3,000 total City of 
Atlanta Safety personnel, but only  15 percent 
are  women.  Dedicated  child  and  dependent 
care services for safety personnel would support 
recruitment and retention of a diverse workforce, 
increase  employee  productivity,  and  reduce 
related absences.

•  % change in demographics of new 
•  safety personnel
•  % increase in overall applicants 
• 
•  # of children enrolled in program
•  # of child and dependent care centers 

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  % change in employee retention rates
•  % change in number of female personnel 

Lead Implementing Partners:
Atlanta Fire Rescue Department, Atlanta Police 
Department, Atlanta Police Foundation, Quality 
of Care for Children

servicing alternative work schedules

after pilot program

for employment

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders
Secondary Driver
Supports Livelihoods & Employment;
Fosters Long-Term & Integrated  
Planning

Action 2.3.3: Increase access to affordable, high-quality 
child care programs for infants and toddlers in Metro Atlanta 
through policy, regulation and new funding options for 
subsidies and scholarships
Ensure  that  all  child  care  programs  in  Metro 
Atlanta  are  participating  in  Quality  Rated, 
Georgia  voluntary  childcare 
rating  and 
improvement  system,  and  that  low-income 
families  have  access  to  State  subsidies  and 
scholarship funds that make high-quality care 
affordable  by  2025.  Countless  studies  have 
found  that  children  who  are  in  high-quality 
early  learning  environments  are  more  likely  to 
succeed in school and in life. Yet, a 2008 study of 
State child care programs found that nearly two 
out of three infants and toddlers were enrolled 
in  poor  quality  programs.  Georgia’s  Quality 
Rated  program  provides  training  and  support 
to  help  child  care  providers  improve  their 
quality of care, as well as tools to help parents 
identify high quality providers. The cost of high-
quality  early  education  exceeds  the  means 
of  many  low-income  families,  demanding  as 
much  as  40  percent  of  a  low-income  family’s 
monthly  budget  in  Georgia.  While  the  State 
provides  subsidies  for 
low-income  working 
families through the Child and Parent Services 
program  (CAPS),  funding  for  CAPS  is  limited, 
and  less  than  10  percent  of  eligible  families 
receive access to funding. Moreover, the subsidy 
does  not  cover  the  full  cost  of  a  high-quality 
program,  limiting  parental  choice  and  access 
to quality care. Increasing access to affordable, 
high-quality  child  care  programs  for  infants 
and toddlers will involve working to encourage 
child care programs to enroll in and continue to 
participate in Georgia’s Quality Rated program. 
In addition, State and City officials, the business 
community,  nonprofits,  and  the  philanthropic 
community  will 
collaborative 
partnership  to  consider  and  support  funding 
options to make new scholarships available to 
low-income families.  

Lead Implementing Partners:
Georgia Early Education Alliance for Ready, 
Students (GEEARS), Bright from the Start, 
United Way of Greater Atlanta, Quality Care 
for Children
 
Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  % increase in Quality Rated child care 

Atlanta receiving a public or privately 
funded subsidy or scholarship for child care

•  % increase in low income families in Metro 

•  # of children enrolled in high quality 

programs in Metro Atlanta

learning environments

create  a 

  

62

Pathforce teaching bike safety during our youth mentorship 
program. Photo Credit: Atlanta Police Department

63

VISION 2 SHARED INSPIRATION

VISION 2: 
SHARED INSPIRATION 
FROM THE 100RC 
GLOBAL NETWORK

VISION 2 SHARED INSPIRATION

ACTION 2.3.1: 
Boston is increasing access to good-
paying jobs, entrepreneurial opportunities, 
and asset-building strategies.

ACTION 2.2.4: 
Boston is developing an Economic 
Mobility Lab that would work across City 
departments and agencies to advance 
economic mobility for Bostonians.

ACTION 2.2.2: 
Glasgow is working with the education system 
and local industry to identify new training and 
learning opportunities for young people.

ACTION 2.1.1: 
Pittsburgh is pursuing funding 
and resources to offer Pre-K for all 
of Pittsburgh’s children to equal 
access to Pre-K education reduce in 
disparities in educational outcomes 
later in life. 

ACTION 2.2.2: 
Norfolk is retaining talent via 
LiveNorfolk, a summer program that 
gives young people interning in Norfolk 
the chance to experience the quality of 
life that the city has to offer.

ACTION 2.3.2: 
Norfolk is enlivening commercial 
corridors with new local businesses by 
providing discounted retail space to 
startup businesses.

64

ACTION 2.3.1: 
New Orleans Network for Economic 
Opportunity focuses on connecting 
disadvantaged job seekers and 
businesses to opportunities.

ACTION 2.1.1: 
New York offers free, full-day, high-quality 
Pre-K for every four year-old to ensure all New 
York children have the opportunity to enter 
elementary school with a solid foundation for 
future success.

65

“

The future belongs to those who 

believe in the beauty of their dreams.

- Eleanor Roosevelt

 “

VISION

03

BUILD OUR 
FUTURE CITY 
TODAY

Facilitate the development of an 
equitable and inclusive city while 
preserving and expanding Atlanta’s 
natural environment.

66
66

Rendering of the Stitch.  Photo Credit: Central Atlanta Progress

67

VISION 03

BUILD OUR FUTURE CITY 
TODAY 

We  envision  a  region  that  enhances  transportation  options,  supports  economic  mobility,  and 
improves the quality of life for all Atlantans. With these Actions, Atlanta will develop an equitable 
built environment that enables all Metro Atlantans to live in vibrant neighborhoods with mixed-
income  housing,  multiple  modes  of  transportation,  healthy  food  options,  and  access  to  public 
greenspace. 

The spatial distribution of inequality in the region has resulted in concentrated pockets of high-
poverty and low-income populations, specifically in neighborhoods south of I-20. At the same time, 
limited public transportation options and extensive traffic congestion hinder access to employment 
centers,  recreational  areas,  and  even  grocery  stores,  making  it  difficult  for  households  to  meet 
their most basic needs. Fostering a region of healthy, inclusive, and connected neighborhoods that 
improve the quality of life for those residing in the region requires Metro Atlanta to take significant 
steps to create a more livable city.

68

VISION 3 TARGET OVERVIEW

Vision 03:
Target Overview

TARGET 3.1

100%

26%

ATLANTA
HOUSEHOLDS

50

I

N
C
O
M
E

0

TARGET 3.2

I

               
E
D
W
N
O
T
A
N
%
9
6

 

I

40%

Nationwide

21%
Atlanta

 

L
T
A
%
8
3

Access

 to Transit

Access to jobs 

by Transit

Improve  quality,  access,  and  distribution  of  affordable  housing  in 
Metro Atlanta.
Atlanta  will  work  to  improve  the  quality,  access,  and  distribution  of 
affordable  housing  in  Metro  Atlanta  by  encouraging  mixed  income 
development.  Today,  26  percent  of  Atlanta’s  households  spend  more 
than 50 percent of their income on housing costs, with many of these 
households  concentrated  in  low-income,  low-access  neighborhoods 
across the region.33 Actions 3.1.1-3.1.4 improve the quality and quantity 
of affordable housing in the city. Actions 3.1.5-3.1.6 aim to empower local 
communities to better advocate for their needs and avoid displacement.

Improve access to transportation across Metro Atlanta. 
The  City  will  work  to  improve  transportation  connections  across  Metro 
Atlanta. Today, the MARTA system is largely concentrated in the city’s core 
and is unable to offer many efficient routes to move people between where 
they live and work throughout the region. A 2011 study by the Brookings 
Institute revealed that only 38 percent of the working-age population in 
Atlanta had access to public transit, compared to 69 percent nationwide; 
those with access could only reach 21 percent of Atlanta jobs within 90 
minutes, compared with 40 percent of jobs nationwide.34 In fact, for many 
residents of the region, mass transit is both slower and more expensive 
than  driving,  given  the  abundance  of  free  and  subsidized  parking  in 
Atlanta.

Action  3.2.1  calls  for  a  coordinated  approach  to  the  transit  service 
expansion into underserved communities, ensuring new lines are prioritized 
in  low-access,  low-income  areas  of  the  region.  Action  3.2.2  advocates 
for continued collaboration between regional transportation agencies to 
create a seamless transportation network for all of Metro Atlanta. Action 
3.2.3 expands bike- and car-share offerings in underserved neighborhoods 
where  those  services  are  traditionally  under  represented.  Action  3.2.4 
explores  policies  and  programs  to  increase  the  use  of  non-automobile 
transportation methods to increase mobility options for Atlanta residents. 
Action 3.2.5 integrates existing data into a single transportation app to 
improve user experience and encourage greater use of non-automobile 
modes of transportation.

69
69

VISION 3 TARGET OVERVIEW

TARGET 3.3

Reduction in 
food deserts 
since 2010
53%

farm
11

s

49

o

r

c

h
a
r
d
s

ardens

g

 
y

t

i

n

u

m

189

com

Distribution of urban 

agriculture

36%

TARGET 3.4

only
41%

TARGET 3.5

SAVINGS

 $21.85

PER GALLON

70

Ensure every Atlantan lives within one-half mile of fresh food 
by 2025.
The City will work with local organizations to ensure that every Atlantan 
lives within a half-mile of fresh food by 2025. Over the past few years, urban 
agriculture has grown rapidly. Atlanta now boasts 11 farms, 49 orchards, 
and 189 community gardens all within city limits. Atlanta’s efforts in urban 
agriculture have reduced food deserts in the city from 53 percent to 36 
percent since 2010. Action 3.3.1 takes the first step in creating a resilient 
local food system for the city by studying existing assets and identifying 
gaps.  Action  3.3.2  creates  an  entity  to  distribute  urban  land  to  local 
farmers and promotes the use of a citywide brand and infrastructure for 
selling local fresh food products.

Create 500 new acres of publicly accessible greenspace by 2022. 
The City will create 500 new acres of publicly accessible greenspace by 
2022. Public open spaces foster civic connection and build social capital 
while  improving  environmental  health  and  increasing  opportunity  for 
physical activity. However, according to the 2009 City of Atlanta Project 
Greenspace assessment, only 41 percent of Atlantans live in areas where 
they  can  safely  walk  to  a  nearby  park,  and  many  of Atlanta’s  existing 
parks are smaller than the national threshold for a full-service park. Since 
Project Greenspace was published, the City has worked diligently to add 
new parks and greenspace but there is still a critical need for accessible 
greenspace.  In  Action  3.4.1,  the  City  will  construct  the  Proctor  Creek 
Greenway trail to increase public greenspace and transit access, catalyze 
economic development, and create a healthy livable environment for an 
area of the city which faces considerable environmental and economic 
challenges. Action 3.4.2 creates a funding strategy to support and ensure 
a more equal distribution of greenspace throughout the city. Action 3.4.3 
expands the functions of the City of Atlanta Tree Recompense Fund to 
better protect and grow Atlanta’s tree canopy.

 Install sustainable energy- and water-efficient infrastructure 
improvements in public spaces as well as around 500 homes and 
businesses each year.
The  City  will  work  with  local  organizations,  businesses,  and  private-
property owners to install water-and energy-efficient systems in order to 
manage drought, stormwater flooding, and rising energy costs to ensure 
a sustainable future for the city. For instance, most commercial entities, 
such  as  restaurants,  are  billed  primarily  at Tier  3-usage  rates,  so  every 
gallon of water conserved would produce savings of $21.85 per gallon of 
water.38 Action 3.5.1 develops a restaurant water-efficiency program to 
reduce waste and water costs. Action 3.5.2 recommends the creation of a 
stormwater utility fee to fund green infrastructure improvements. Action 
3.5.3 increases the use of solar improvements through bulk purchasing 
options.  Action  3.5.4  educates  and  encourages  homeowners  to  adopt 
energy-saving techniques. Action 3.5.5 supports a resilient infrastructure 
demonstration project on Ted Turner Drive to encourage innovation and 
greater use of resilient infrastructure across Metro Atlanta.

Vision 03:
Action Launch 
Dates

2016

ACTION 3.3.2
Develop, integrate, and institutionalize 
urban agriculture into policies, 
programs, and projects

2017

ACTION 3.1.2
Decrease the number of housing 
cost-burdened residents and increase 
the production and preservation of 
affordable housing
ACTION 3.4.2
Develop a Parks and Greenspace 
Master Plan by 2019

2018

ACTION 3.5.1  
Launch a restaurant water efficiency 
pilot program for the City of Atlanta 
ACTION 3.5.2
Create a stormwater utility fee to 
develop and fund a comprehensive 
stormwater management program
ACTION 3.5.3
Increase use and access to solar 
energy by 2020 through the creation 
of Solarize Atlanta

2019

ACTION 3.2.4
Create policies and incentives that 
promote use of non-automobile 
transportation methods
ACTION 3.2.5
Create a single transportation app to 
improve user experience and use of 
non-automibile modes

Q1

Q1

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

Q3
Q4

Q1

Q2

VISION 3 ACTION TIMELINE

ACTION 3.4.1 
Complete construction of the first 
segment of the Proctor Creek 
Greenway by 2018 

ACTION 3.5.4
Lift the energy burden on 10 percent 
of Atlanta households
ACTION 3.5.5
Host a resilient infrastructure design 
competition in 2018
ACTION 3.1.5
Launch an enterprise data platform 
and data literacy education program
ACTION 3.1.1
Improve quality of affordable housing 
and strengthen resident resilience
ACTION 3.1.4
Increase access to permanent housing 
for homeless and aid in ending chronic 
homelessness in the city by 2020
ACTION 3.2.3
Expand bike and car share 
opportunities in underserved 
communities by 2020
ACTION 3.3.1
Develop a resilient local food system 
by 2025
ACTION 3.4.3
Protect and expand Atlanta’s 
tree canopy

ACTION 3.1.3
Create citywide housing 
resilience standards and a 
toolkit of initiatives to make 
housing developments more 
affordable and resilient
ACTION 3.1.6
Expand the Anti-Displacement 
Tax Fund to mitigate 
gentrification market forces

ACTION  3.2.1 
Expand transit service routes 
throughout Metro Atlanta, 
especially in low-income, low-access 
communities
ACTION 3.2.2
Create an integrated fare structure 
across Atlanta’s transit providers

71

VISION 3 TARGET 3.1

VISION 3 TARGET 3.1

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Action 3.1.1: Improve quality of affordable housing and 
strengthen resident resilience
Develop programs and policies to improve the quality of the 
current  existing  affordable  housing  stock,  and  strengthen 
homeowner and tenant resilience in the face of sudden shocks. 
Beginning  in 2018,  the  City will  convene  a working  group  to 
implement the following program and policy changes: reform 
and  modernize  building  codes,  tax  codes,  and  foreclosure 
policies;  create  an  education  campaign  on  homeowners’ 
emergency  assistance,  emergency 
repair,  and  home 
maintenance programs; develop a tenants’ rights education 
campaign  on  code  enforcement;  support  rapid  response 
rental assistance which include counseling services for tenants 
facing  eviction;  and  create  a  City  requirement  that  County 
Marshal  services  must  provide  notification  before  removing 
evicted  tenants.  These  programs  will  not  only  improve  the 
quality  and  safety  of  Atlanta’s  existing  affordable  housing 
stock,  but  will  also  strengthen  renters’  rights  and  residents’ 
resilience by better protecting them from negligent landlords 
and decreasing the likelihood of foreclosures and evictions for 
low-income families.

Primary Driver
Meets Basic Needs

Secondary Driver
Empowers a Broad 
Range of Stakeholders
Secondary Driver
Fosters Long-Term & 
Integrated  Planning

Lead Implementing Partners:
Atlanta Police Department , CoA 
Department of City Planning, 
Atlanta Volunteer Lawyers 
Foundation, Housing 
Justice League

Potential Metrics/Measures of 
Success:
•  # of reformed building codes, 
tax codes, foreclosure policies

•  # of foreclosures
•  # of homeowner assistance 

education events 
•  # of renters’ rights 
      education events 
•  # of renters utilizing eviction 

counseling services 

•  # of eviction notices served 

Partner Spotlight

Atlanta Volunteer Lawyers 
Foundation 
The Atlanta Volunteer Lawyers Foundation (AVLF) 
is the largest provider of pro bono legal services 
in  Greater  Atlanta.  Created  in  1979,  current 
programs  include  services  for  domestic violence 
survivors, 
landlord/tenant  disputes,  evictions, 
unpaid wages, and probate issues. AVLF aims to 
create  safe  and  stable  homes  and  families  by 
inspiring attorneys to fight for equal justice, and 
provides low-income Atlantans high-quality 

legal representation.

housing 

Resilience Value to Atlantans:  

Primary Driver
Meets Basic Needs

Secondary Driver
Fosters Long-Term & Integrated  

Secondary Driver
Promotes Leadership & Effective 

Action 3.1.2: Decrease the number of housing cost-burdened 
residents and increase the production and preservation of 
affordable housing  
Conduct  a  detailed  assessment  to  identify 
the  city’s  existing  housing  needs,  forecast 
future 
needs  given  projected 
population growth, create policy and program 
recommendations for meeting current and future 
needs, and design goals and metrics that inform 
an  overarching  Housing  Resilience  Strategy. 
Concerns over maintaining affordable housing 
stock  in  the  City  of  Atlanta  have  intensified 
rapidly in the wake of a newly energized housing 
market  and  spike  in  population  growth. As  of 
2015, just under half of Atlanta households are 
cost-burdened, spending more than 30 percent 
of  their  incomes  on  housing,  with  more  than 
a  quarter  of  these  households  spending  more 
than 50 percent of their income on housing.38 
Given  the  city’s  projected  population  growth 
from 440,000 in 2015 to 1.2 million residents by 
2040,  housing  prices  are  expected  to  further 
rise  with  increased  demand.  In  November 
2017,  the  City  of  Atlanta  Department  of  City 
Planning  commissioned  an  Equitable  Housing 
Needs  Assessment  to  determine  policies, 
programs, and development needs to decrease 
the number of housing cost-burdened residents 
and  increase  the  production  and  preservation 
of affordable housing. These recommendations 
will  inform  an  overarching  Housing  Resilience 
Strategy to address development of new housing 
stock, retention and maintenance of currently 
existing  affordable  housing,  homeowner  and 
renter resilience initiatives, and programs that 
support aging in place.

of the Housing Needs Assessment 
•  # of community engagement and 
      outreach events 

Funding: Fully-funded; CoA Department of 
City Planning 

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of initiatives implemented out of the 

Lead Implementing Partners:
CoA Department of City Planning, CoA Mayor’s 
Office of Resilience, HR&A Advisors, Inc.

•  # of stakeholders included in the production 

Housing Resilience Strategy

72

73

VISION 3 TARGET 3.1

VISION 3 TARGET 3.1

implement  resilience 

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Primary Driver
Meets Basic Needs

Secondary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & 
Engaged Communities

Action 3.1.3: Create citywide housing resilience standards and 
a toolkit of initiatives to make housing development more 
affordable and resilient
Establish  a  housing  and  resilience  toolkit  to 
support  citywide  housing  resilience  standards. 
In  partnership  with  the  Atlanta  BeltLine,  Inc., 
Invest Atlanta, regional housing authorities, and 
private developers, the City will work to develop 
and 
initiatives  aimed 
at  making  housing  more  affordable,  such  as 
conducting energy and water efficiency audits, 
installing  LED  lighting,  low-flow  toilets,  green 
infrastructure,  and  community  gardens.  This 
toolkit would also include innovative financing 
tools,  such  as  social  impact  investing,  to 
encourage the development of resilient mixed-
income  housing  with 
long-term  affordable 
housing  commitments.  Mixed-income  housing 
can provide a variety of benefits for residents, 
including 
improved  amenities  and  greater 
access to jobs without insurmountable housing 
and  transportation  costs.  At  the  same  time, 
more  diverse  housing  developments  can  also 
improve the neighborhood environment through 
increased  community  cohesion  and  tolerance. 
This initiative will kick off in December 2017 with 
a review of existing tools and a compilation of 
recommendations  for how the City can better 
collaborate  with  other  organizations  in  the 
housing resilience space.

Lead Implementing Partners:
Atlanta BeltLine, Inc., Invest Atlanta, CoA 
Department of Planning, Atlanta Housing 
Authority, CoA Mayor’s Office of Resilience

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of affordable units built 
•  # of affordable housing initiatives with 

Secondary Driver
Fosters Economic Prosperity

•  $ of new funding allocated to support 

resilience components

affordable housing  

Partner Spotlight

Partners for HOME ClearPath

The  City  of  Atlanta  and  United  Way  have 
partnered  to  end  chronic  homelessness  by 
committing $50 million to renovate housing 
for homeless populations, add shelter space, 
and  create  permanent  housing  to  make 
homelessness a rare and brief occurrence in 
the City of Atlanta. Over $7 million will fund 

74

the  acquisition  and  renovation  of  shelters 
over the next three years. The biggest portion 
of these funds, over $16 million, will be used 
to  buy  and  renovate  500  units  throughout 
the city to offer permanent homes for

the homeless.29 

families 

homeless 

families  often 

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Primary Driver
Meets Basic Needs

Secondary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range 
of Stakeholders

Lead Implementing Partners:
Atlanta Partners for HOME, Atlanta Housing 
Authority, CoA Department of City Planning 

Action 3.1.4: Increase access to permanent housing for the 
homeless and aid in ending chronic homelessness in the city 
by 2020
Create  an  outreach  program  to  encourage 
to  accept  permanent  housing 
landlords 
subsidies 
from 
and 
individuals.  When  first  transitioning  out  of 
homelessness,  chronically  homeless  individuals 
and 
require  permanent 
supportive  housing,  which  includes  supportive 
services  such  as  health  care,  counseling,  and 
career training to build independent living and 
tenancy skills. Once tenants have developed the 
necessary skills, they often choose to move into 
permanent housing on their own. To facilitate 
this  move,  the  Atlanta  Housing  Authority 
and  U.S.  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs,  in 
partnership  with  Atlanta  Partners  for  HOME, 
offer housing subsidies to landlords who provide 
permanent  housing  to  formerly  homeless 
individuals  and  families.  These  vouchers  not 
only  benefit  formerly  homeless  by  expanding 
the number of housing units available, but also 
benefit  landlords  by  ensuring  consistent  rent 
payments.  However,  many  landlords  do  not 
accept  these  housing  subsidies.  Beginning  in 
2018,  implementing partners, including Atlanta 
Partners for HOME and others, will coordinate 
education outreach to landlords to explain why 
they  should  participate  in  the  program  and 
work  on  retaining  landlords  currently  in  the 
program. The goal of this initiative is to support 
the  movement  of  families  and  individuals  out 
of  permanent  supportive  housing  and  into 
permanent  housing,  thus  opening  space  in 
permanent  supportive  housing  for  others  in 
need.  This  program  will  be  critical  in  meeting 
the City’s commitment to make homelessness 
rare and brief and to end chronic homelessness 
in the city by 2020.

 
Funding: Partially Funded; Atlanta Partners 
for HOME

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of landlord education and 
      outreach events 
•  # of new landlords enrolling in the program 
•  # of new units that accept housing 

•  # of turnovers in permanent supportive 

•  # of families and individuals living in 

permanent housing using subsidies

subsidies within 24 months 

housing units

75

VISION 3 TARGET 3.1

VISION 3 TARGET 3.1

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Lead Implementing Partners:
CoA Information Management, Microsoft 
Corporation, Georgia Institute of Technology

Primary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & 
Engaged Communities
Secondary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range 
of Stakeholders
Secondary Driver
Fosters Long-Term & 
Integrated  Planning

Action 3.1.5: Launch an enterprise data platform and data 
literacy education program
Develop  and  deploy  a  central  platform  for 
organizing  and  correlating  data  across  city 
and regional partners. By providing a universal 
location  for  data  access  in  the  region,  the 
partners  will  be  able  to  simplify  access  to 
government data and will be able to create an 
analytical  foundation  that  greatly  speeds  the 
discovery,  application,  and  insights  possible 
when  accessing  computer 
readable  data 
streams. Currently access to authoritative data 
sets  is  extremely  time  consuming  and  error 
prone as no single source of information exists. 
Once the City has established this platform, it 
will  deploy  additional  analytical  tools  that  will 
enable  better  discovery  and  visualization  of 
trends  and  patterns  irrespective  of  the  source 
system  capturing  the  relevant 
information. 
Access  to  this  new  data  platform  will  be 
complimented by a free data literacy education 
program  for  community  members.  Identifying 
community assets that speak to a community's 
health  and  wellness  enables  community 
members  to  identify  strengths,  weaknesses, 
opportunities,  and  threats  in  their  community 
thus empowering communities to advocate for, 
prioritize, and fund proposed projects with data. 
Furthermore,  this  platform  will  better  support 
long-term  neighborhood  planning.  Numerous 
groups  in  the  region  have  requested  access  to 
this  system  for  academic  research,  nonprofit 
application  development, 
intergovernmental 
cooperation,  and  commercial  development 
purposes.  In  addition  to  the  community  data 
literacy  program,    the  City  will  partner  with 
Commercial  Improvement  Districts  (CIDs)  to 
develop  customized  dashboards  and  tools  to 
aide CIDs in monitoring mission success.

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of internal data sources available on 
      the platform
•  # of external data sources available on 
      the platform
•  # of unique hits on the platform
•  # of customers on the platform
•  # of applications developed against 
      the platform
•  Volume of data accessed per month from 

•  # of data literacy training courses 
•  % improvement in community member’s 

data literacy before and after courses, 
measured through assessments

Funding: Partially Funded; City of Atlanta

the platform

City of Atlanta Department of Planning’s Atlanta City 
Studio. Photo Credit: City of Atlanta

76
76

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Primary Driver
Fosters Economic Prosperity

Action 3.1.6: Expand the Anti-Displacement Tax Fund to 
mitigate gentrification market forces
Expand  the Anti-Displacement Tax  Fund  to  at 
least  three  neighborhoods  identified  by  the 
the  Housing  Needs  Assessment  and  housing 
resilience strategy being developed by the City 
of Atlanta’s Office of Housing and Community 
Development. Currently the Tax Fund will cover 
the  cost  of  qualifying  homeowners’  property 
tax  increases  in  the  English Avenue, Vine  City, 
Ashview Heights, and Atlanta University Center 
neighborhoods.  The  program  is  designed  to 
help  ensure  that  current  homeowners  are  not 
displaced  due  to  rising  property  values  and 
therefore  rising  property  taxes,  spurred  by 
economic  development  projects  such  as  the 
Atlanta  BeltLine  and  Mercedes-Benz  Stadium. 
The existing fund, administered by the Westside 
Future  Fund  and  sourced  from  philanthropic 
donations, will operate as a grant for individuals 
and  will  not  require  participants  to  reimburse 
any funds received. 

Secondary Driver
Promotes Cohesive &
Engaged Communities
Lead Implementing Partners:
Westside Community Retention Collaborative 
Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of homeowners issued grants
•  % decrease in displacement of homeowners 

•  # of additional qualifying neighborhoods 

in target neighborhoods. 

added to fund coverage 

Funding: Arthur M. Blank Family Foundation, 
Chick-fil-A Foundation, Georgia Power 
Foundation, Cox Enterprises, Pulte Group, Delta 
Air Lines, Georgia-Pacific, Tommy Holder — 
Chairman and CEO of Holder 
Construction Company

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Provides Reliable Communication 
& Mobility 
Secondary Driver
Fosters Long-Term & 
Integrated  Planning

Action 3.2.1: Expand transit service routes throughout Metro 
Atlanta, especially in low-income, low-access communities 
Engage  in  a  planning  process  for  new,  high-
capacity transit routes with a specific focus on 
the City of Atlanta as well as Clayton, DeKalb, 
and Fulton Counties to ensure equitable access 
and mobility throughout the core Metro region. 
The  Mayor  of  the  City  of  Atlanta,  as  a  Board 
Member  of  the Atlanta  Regional  Commission, 
will  actively  promote  the  benefits  of  a  robust 
integrated regional transportation system, such 
as increased mobility options and greater access 
to job centers and will support the expansion of 
MARTA into other core Metro counties including 
Cobb, Gwinnett, and Douglas Counties.  In Fall 
2014,  Clayton  County  voters  approved,  with 
over 70 percent of the vote, to expand MARTA 
into  their  jurisdiction.  Bus  routes  are  already 
operating  in  the  County  and  discussions  are 
taking place to implement high capacity transit 
service. Additionally, the City will identify ways 
to address first/last mile connectivity to mass 
transit in low-income, low-access communities.

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of transit riders in new counties 
      and stations 
•  Reduction in total travel time on transit
• 
Increase in access to jobs and resources 
Funding: Partially Funded; T-SPLOST, MARTA 
sales tax

Lead Implementing Partners:
Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority, 
Atlanta Regional Commission, CoA Department 
of City Planning

77
77

PARTNER FEATURE MARTA INITIATIVES 

PARTNER FEATURE:
MARTA INITIATIVES

Although  planned  since  the  1950s,  the  Metropolitan  Atlanta  Rapid  Transit 
Authority (MARTA) did not come to fruition until 1972 when MARTA  purchased 
the  Atlanta  Transit  System,  Atlanta’s  main  bus  system.  Since  then,  MARTA 
has grown to 48 miles of rail and over 740 bus stops operating in four Metro 
Atlanta counties. Ranked as one of in the top 10 transportation agencies in 
the U.S., MARTA provides transit to over 500,000 people every weekday and 
employs almost 25,000 Metro Atlantans.19

In 2016 voters passed two historic referenda. The City of Atlanta will collect 
an  additional  4/10  penny  transportation  special  purpose  local  option  sales 
tax (T-SPLOST) for transportation improvements , and MARTA will collect an 
additional 1/2  penny  sales  tax  in  funding  for  MARTA  and  transit  expansion. 
These funds will help expand and improve the overall transit and transportation 
system in Atlanta..

Highlights: 
Transit-Oriented Development
In  2010,  MARTA  adopted  Transit-Oriented 
Development (TOD) Guidelines, which define the 
uses,  densities,  and  physical  design  standards 
MARTA envisions around its stations, as well as 
the project parameters the agency seeks when 
pursuing  joint  developments  on  MARTA-owned 
station-area  properties.  The  guidelines  (1) 
organize the 38 MARTA stations into typologies 
largely  based  on  desired  level  of  density,  (2) 
detail  the  physical  development  standards  for 
each  typology,  and  (3)  provide  guidance  on 
the  approach  to  the  replacement  of  existing 
transit  facilities  such  as  parking.  Since  MARTA 

WondeRoot’s EnRoute public art mural at Oakland City 
MARTA station. Photo Credit: Tranformation Alliance 

78

adopted  its  TOD  Guidelines  and  reinvigorated 
its joint development initiative, the agency has 
advanced several joint development projects at 
Arts  Center,  Avondale,  Chamblee,  Edgewood/
Candler  Park,  King  Memorial,  and  Lindbergh 
stations.  Through  these  transformative  TOD 
projects,  MARTA  is  helping  to  create  vibrant 
neighborhoods with the addition of over 49,000 
square feet of parks and public space, 445,000 
square feet of retail space, 70,000 square feet of 
office space, and 1,200 housing units. In addition, 
MARTA was among the first transit agencies to 
adopt an affordable housing target for its joint 
development  projects,  committing  to  keep 
20  percent  of  units  in Atlanta  affordable,  thus 
ensuring all Atlantans can benefit from transit 
and community enhancements.

PARTNER FEATURE MARTA INITIATIVES 

Technology Updates
In  order  to  ensure  maximum  accessibility  and 
customer  satisfaction,  MARTA  is  implementing 
significant technology upgrades. By the end of 
2017, MARTA will launch a mobile fare-payment 
app, which will eventually eliminate the need for 
MARTA cards, as well as increase opportunities for 
partnerships with conventions and special events 
to include fares with registrations. Additionally, 
MARTA is upgrading its infrastructure to support 
underground cellular access and WiFi on buses 
and  trains  by  early  2018.  The  agency  is  also 
working  to  replace  outdated  audio  and  video 
information systems that display upcoming train 
and bus schedules, which will include additional 
space for other important information 
and messages.
For more information, please visit: 
www.itsmarta.com

Food and Retail
In  partnership  with  the  Atlanta  Community 
Food  Bank,  Georgia  Food  Oasis,  Community 
Farmers  Markets,  and  South  West  Atlanta 
Growers  (SWAG),  MARTA  piloted  a  fresh  food 
retail model in 2015 known as the Fresh MARTA 
Market. The  market  not  only  provides  partners 
and  local  growers  economic  opportunities  but 
also provides a convenient location to purchase 
fresh, affordable produce in a community with 
many public transit-reliant individuals. The Fresh 
MARTA  Market  expanded  to  four  stations  in 
2016:  West  End,  Five  Points,  College  Park,  and 
Hamilton E. Holmes. With day-to-day operations 
supported  by  community  partner  Organix 
Matters,  tens  of  thousands  of  people  visit  the 
market  each  year  and  take  advantage  of  the 
two-for-one Supplemental Nutrition Assistance 
Program  (SNAP)  on  produce.  In  addition  to 
expanding  the  Fresh  MARTA  Market  to  other 
transit stations, MARTA also plans to build on-
site retail in high-traffic stations, set to launch 
in late 2018

79

VISION 3 TARGET 3.2

VISION 3 TARGET 3.2

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Provides Reliable 
Communication & Mobility 

Action 3.2.2: Create an integrated fare structure across 
Atlanta’s transit providers
Connect the regional transit authorities in Metro 
Atlanta through one fare structure to allow for 
easier maneuverability for passengers throughout 
the region. With the new MARTA Breeze cards, 
which have the capability to transfer between the 
different  regional  transit  authorities,  the  move 
towards  an  integrated  regional  transportation 
system is already underway. By the end of 2018, 
the City will propose to incorporate this action 
into the State’s regional transit vision, which is 
identifying congestion concerns and transient-
oriented solutions in the Atlanta region. Creating 
an  infrastructure  that  continues  to  support 
interconnectedness of our vast region is integral 
to  the  future  of  Metro Atlanta  and will  reduce 
the  financial  and  time  costs  associated  with 
transferring  between  transit  systems—making 
public transit a more affordable and attractive 
alternative to personal automobile use.

Secondary Driver
Promotes Leadership & 
Effective Management
Lead Implementing Partners:
Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority, 
CobbLinc, Gwinnett County Transit, Georgia 
Regional Transportation Authority

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  % change in ridership before and after 

Secondary Driver
Fosters Economic Prosperity

integration

•  $ change in revenue
•  Changes in car traffic on 
      major arteries

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Action 3.2.3: Expand bike and car share opportunities in 
underserved communities by 2020
Expand  bike and car share options in underserved 
communities 
to  provide  clean,  alternate 
forms  of  transportation  by  working  with  the 
community  and  respective  public  and  private 
partners  to  identify  and  overcome  barriers  to 
use.  Bike  and  car  share  programs  provide  the 
opportunity  for  all  Metro  Atlantans  to  access 
vital  transportation  networks,  basic  needs, 
and  employment  centers  and  to  experience 
all  that Atlanta  offers.  In 2016, Atlanta’s  Relay 
Bike  Share  program  expanded  from  100  bikes 
at 22 stations to 500 bikes at over 60 locations, 
including  under-served  neighborhoods  such  as 
Vine  City,  the West  End,  and  Gordon  E. White 
Park. Currently, T-SPLOST funding is allotted to 
expand the bike share system to 1,000 bikes with 
a focus on neighborhoods south of I-20. Plans to 
launch a pilot car-share program 
are underway.

Lead Implementing Partners:
CoA Department of City Planning, CoA Mayor’s 
Office of Resilience
Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  Bike and car share usage rates per location 
•  Air quality measurements at 
• 
•  # of new bike and car 
      share locations 
Funding: Partially Funded; CoA Mayor’s Office 
of Resilience, T-SPLOST

Primary Driver
Provides Reliable 
Communication 
& Mobility 
Secondary Driver
Fosters Long-Term & 
Integrated  Planning

regular intervals

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Action 3.2.4: Create policies and incentives that promote use 
of non-automobile transportation methods
Identify  ways  that  Atlanta  can  promote  the 
use  of  public  transportation  options  through 
policy changes and incentives, such as removing 
minimum  parking  space  requirements  for  new 
development projects and implementing parking 
maximum 
requirements.  Non-automobile 
transportation  policies  and  initiatives  improve 
the  quality  of  life  for  Atlantans  throughout 
the  region  by  incentivizing  cleaner  means  of 
transportation.  However,  the  abundance  of 
low cost parking in the city has contributed to 
Atlanta’s  auto-oriented  culture.  The  city  has 
90,000  parking  spaces,  but  30,000  of  those 
spaces  are  unused  even  during  peak  times.  By 
2019 the City will pursue innovative approaches 
to  promoting  non-automobile  transportation 
methods through creative designs to repurpose 
unused  parking  spaces  for  bike  storage,  green 
infrastructure, or other active street programs.

Lead Implementing Partners:
CoA Department of City Planning, CoA Mayor’s 
Office of Resilience
Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  % change in parking ratios
•  # of new parking spaces built
•  % change in public transportation ridership
•  Transportation demand management 

Primary Driver
Provides Reliable 
Communication & Mobility 
Secondary Driver
Fosters Long-Term & 
Integrated  Planning

programs (TDM)

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Action 3.2.5: Create a single transportation app to improve 
user experience and use of non-automobile modes
Merge  existing  transportation 
information 
platforms and apps like CommuteATL.com and 
ATLtransit.org  to  provide  real-time  commuter 
information to maximize route options, including 
trailways and bike lanes, and provide immediate 
access to integrated alternative transportation 
routes during shocks. Mobility is critical to Metro 
Atlanta’s economy and quality of life, but it is 
also one of the region's most challenging issues. 
The  City  will  support  the  Atlanta  Regional 
Commission (ARC) in compiling data into one 
location  both  as  a  website  and  as  an  app  to 
provide users with accurate, real-time data for 
optimal  commute  routes  throughout  Metro 
Atlanta.  The  City  of  Atlanta’s 
Information 
Management Department has already initiated 
the migration CommuteATL.com to the ARC’s 
platform.  Launch  of  the  new  website  and 
accompanying app is planned for early 2018.

Primary Driver
Fosters Long-Term & 
Integrated  Planning
Secondary Driver
Provides Reliable Communication 
& Mobility 

Lead Implementing Partners:
Atlanta Regional Commission, CoA Information 
Management Department

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of citizens involved in the transportation 

•  # of unique page views of the platform
•  # of downloads of the app
Funding: Funded; Atlanta Regional Commission 

planning process

80

81

VISION 3 TARGET 3.3

VISION 3 TARGET 3.3

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Meets Basic Needs

Secondary Driver
Fosters Economic Prosperity

Secondary Driver
Supports Livelihoods 
& Employment

Action 3.3.1: Develop a resilient local food system by 2025
Develop  a  resilient  local  food  system  to 
increase food access, especially to fresh and 
healthy foods, and to create new opportunities 
for education and employment. This initiative 
will  develop  a  strategy  stemming  from 
the  recommendations  of  a  2017  report 
commissioned by The Rockefeller Foundation, 
titled The Resilience of America’s Urban Food 
Systems: Evidence from Five Cities. The City will 
work with local partners to conduct a metro-
wide  food  system  resilience  assessment  to 
understand the role local food systems play 
in  buffering  Metro  Atlanta  from  disruptions 
in national or global food and transportation 
systems  and  to  recommend  City  policies 
to  bolster  city  food  systems.  These  policies 
will  guide  the  integration  of  food  systems 
resilience  into  development  planning  and 
encourage neighborhood-level food resilience 
plans to integrate food and urban agriculture 
into greenspace landscapes. A more resilient 
local  food  system  will  also  strengthen 
food  business  resilience  by  ensuring  racial, 
economic, and social equity within the food 
industry and provide support services for local 
food  producers.  Metro  Atlanta  is  fortunate 
to  be  able  to  build  upon  the  foundation  of 
a  solid  local  food  community. This  initiative 
will  support  the  City’s  goal  of  enabling  all 
Atlantans to live within a half mile or less of 
affordable, fresh, and healthy food.

•  # of new food-related jobs created
•  $ value of locally produced food
• 

• 
•  # of neighborhoods with food plans

Lead Implementing Partners:
CoA  Mayor’s Office of Resilience, Additional 
nonprofit partners

their next meal, as identified 
through questionnaire  

lbs of food distributed through emergency 
food assistance

•  # of people in Metro Atlanta deemed in a 

items, as identified through questionnaire 

production and sales

‘food desert’

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  $ of new economic activity generated by food 

•  The Hunger Vital Sign™  
•  # of times people buy and consume fresh food 

•  # of times people are unsure about obtaining 

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Fosters Economic Prosperity

Action 3.3.2: Develop, integrate, and institutionalize urban 
agriculture into policies, programs, and projects
Identify and distribute 25 acres of arable land 
by 2020 to urban farmers and growers through 
an Urban Agriculture Bank, Conservation, and 
Trust  (UABCT).  Increasing  urban  agriculture 
throughout the city provides greater access to 
local fresh food while also reducing food deserts. 
The  UABCT  is  designed  to  provide  access  to 
farmable land and will be led by a committee 
of  experienced  urban  growers.  In  addition  to 
increasing  access  to  arable  land  within  the 
city,  the  City  and  partners  will  support  the 
existing  collective  marketing  brand  “AgLanta” 
to  promote  fresh  food  purchases  and  value-
added products grown and/or produced within 
city  limits.  A  community  labeling  opportunity 
would  provide  a  professional  sales  platform 
to  launch  $1  million  in  sales  by  2022  for  food 
entrepreneurs.  The  City  will  also  work  with 
partners to implement a city-wide composting 
program. Together, these programs will create 
both  the  physical  space  to  expand  the  urban 
agricultural  sector  and  the  infrastructure  to 
make it a success.

Lead Implementing Partners:
CoA Mayor’s Office of Resilience, Natural 
Resource Conservation Service, 
Groundwork Atlanta

Secondary Driver
Supports Livelihoods & Employment

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of acres acquired 
•  $ of sales generated through gross revenue 

Funding: Partially Funded; CoA Mayor’s Office 
of Resilience

•  # of community compost centers created

and items sold

Funding: Partially Funded; in-kind from 
nonprofit partners

Urban Perform Produce Market. Photo Credit: Georgia Food 
Oasis-Atlanta

82
82

Installation of community gardens at an Atlanta Fire and 
Rescue Station. Photo Credit: City of Atlanta

83

VISION 3 TARGET 3.4

VISION 3 TARGET 3.4

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Primary Driver
Provides & Enhances Natural & 
Manmade Assets
Secondary Driver
Provides Reliable Communication 
& Mobility 
Secondary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & Engaged 
Communities

Action 3.4.1: Complete construction of the first segment of 
the Proctor Creek Greenway by January 2018
Develop the first three miles of the Proctor Creek 
Greenway, running from the Bankhead MARTA 
Station  through  Westside  Quarry  Park  to  the 
existing West Highlands Trail, by January 2018. 
The Master Plan for the Greenway envisions a 
total  of  seven  miles  of  bicycle  and  pedestrian 
trails  alongside  Proctor  Creek,  encompassing 
50  acres  of  linear  park,  spanning  from  the 
BeltLine  Westside  Trail  to  the  Chattahoochee 
Riverwalk (a featured project of the Atlanta City 
Design  Studio  plan).  Proctor  Creek  is  the  only 
watershed located entirely within the city limits; 
yet,  it  is  also  one  of  the  most  compromised 
bodies  of  water  in  the  region,  plagued  with 
pollution, erosion, and high bacteria levels from 
stormwater  and  sewer  overflows  and  illegal 
dumping. The communities surrounding Proctor 
Creek are in an environmental justice hot zone 
due  to  rapid  growth  of  brownfields  resulting 
from  vacant  and  underutilized 
industrial 
properties,  limited  greenspace,  food  deserts, 
and  public  health  threats  resulting  from 
frequent flooding. The Proctor Creek Greenway 
project is holistic in its approach by seeking to 
improve  the  ecological,  economic,  and  social 
vitality of this community, with the core focus 
on enhancing human resilience. The Greenway 
will provide connectivity to existing public transit 
and  the  Atlanta  BeltLine,  promote  economic 
development  along  its  corridor,  incorporate 
green 
infrastructure  to  control  stormwater 
runoff,  highlight  local  art  and  history,  and 
increase opportunities for exercise and healthy 
living.

•  # of trail users during the first year
•  # of sponsored art installations
•  # of exercise classes conducted along 
• 
•  % increase in ridership at Bankhead 
•  MARTA station

Lead Implementing Partners:
CoA Mayor’s Office of Resilience, CoA 
Department of Watershed Management, 
Renew Atlanta, Atlanta BeltLine, Inc., PATH 
Foundation, Emerald Corridor Foundation

Funding: Fully Funded; T-SPLOST, 
PATH Foundation 

related to services for the trail

the trail 

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of new projects and/or businesses directly 

Partner Spotlight

Bellwood Quarry Reservoir

Formerly a 138-acre quarry site, the Bellwood 
Quarry  Reservoir  has  now  become  a 
critical  resilience  project  for  the  City.  As  of 
2017,  Atlanta  only  has  a  three-day  reserve 
of  emergency  water  supplies.  The  $300 
million project is being spearheaded by the 
Department  of  Watershed  Management, 
and,  when  completed  in  December  2019, 
the reservoir will provide a 2.4 billion gallon, 
30-day  backup  water  supply  for  the  city, 
ensuring  reliable  delivery  of  clean  and  safe 
drinking  water  for  city  citizens  for  the  next 
100 years. The quarry is being connected to 

the  Chattahoochee  River  and  the  Hemphill 
and Chattahoochee water treatment plants 
via  a  10-foot  diameter  tunnel  over  five 
miles  long, which  is  being  drilled  by  a  $11.6 
million 400-foot-long tunnel boring machine 
cheekily  dubbed  "Driller  Mike",  in  honor  of 
rapper  and  activist  Killer  Mike.  Once  the 
Reservoir is filled, the City plans to transform 
the  surrounding  land  into  Atlanta’s  largest 
park, which will span 280 acres and include 
hiking and biking trails linked to the Atlanta 
BeltLine, a skate park, outdoor theater, and 
ball fields. 

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Primary Driver
Provides & Enhances Natural & 
Manmade Assets
Secondary Driver
Ensures Continuity of Critical 
Services

Action 3.4.2: Develop a Parks and Greenspace Master Plan 
by 2019
Develop  a  funding  action  plan  for  acquisition, 
maintenance, and development of parks, greenspace, 
and trails, with a focus on how to create an equitable 
distribution  of  these  resources.  The  Master  Plan  will 
be  a  pro-active  roadmap  for  acquiring  greenspace 
and  will  build  on  research  done  for  existing  plans, 
such  as  Project  Greenspace,  released 
in  2009. 
Launching  in  Fall  2017,  the  planning  process  will 
identify  a  reliable  and  permanent  revenue  stream 
for greenspace maintenance and expansion, such as 
dedicated funding in the City budget, green bonds, or 
tree recompense funds -- a critical component of a 
successful plan is to ensure that adequate resources 
are available to purchase and maintain greenspace. 
In addition, the plan will develop criteria for assessing 
potential  sites  for  acquisition  and  prioritize  parcels 
based  on  how  they  score.  By  creating  a  Master 
Plan  for Atlanta’s  parks  and  greenspace,  the  region 
seeks  to  better  position  itself  to  realize  the  many 
benefits afforded by greenspace, including improved 
community health, connectivity, and 
neighborhood cohesion.

Lead Implementing Partners:
CoA Department of City Planning, CoA 
Department of Parks & Recreation, 
Park Pride
Potential Metrics/Measures of Success
•  $ public and private funding for parks 

•  # of acres of greenspace added to 

•  % Atlantans living within one-half mile 

City’s parks inventory

and greenspaces 

of a public park 

Funding: Partially Funded; CoA 
department of City Planning, CoA 
Department of Parks and Recreation 

84

85

VISION 3 TARGET 3.4

VISION 3 TARGET 3.5

including 

Resilience Value for Atlantans: 

Secondary Driver
Ensures Public Health Services

Primary Driver
Provides & Enhances Natural & 
Manmade Assets

Action 3.4.3: Protect and expand Atlanta’s tree canopy
Purchase  forested  properties  within  the  City 
of  Atlanta,  using  development  fees  paid  into 
the  City’s  Tree  Recompense  Fund,  to  secure 
and  protect  Atlanta’s  existing  tree  canopy. 
Tree  conservation  contributes  to  a  number 
of  health  and  environmental  benefits  for 
Atlantans, 
improved  air  quality, 
additional shade, and reductions in air pollution, 
stormwater  runoff,  and  carbon  emissions. The 
City  will  collaborate  closely  with  the  existing 
Canopy  Coalition, 
including  Trees  Atlanta, 
The  Conservation  Fund,  Trust  for  Public  Land, 
The  Nature  Conservancy  of  Georgia,  and  the 
Georgia Conservancy to plant trees with funds 
from the Tree Recompense Fund on City-owned 
properties  and  develop  strategic  partnerships 
with  other  local  government  entities  to  do 
the  same.  While  the  City  has  used  the  Tree 
Recompense Fund to purchase and plant trees 
for  many  years,  this  initiative  would  expand 
the  Fund’s  scope  to  include  land  acquisition, 
inventory  non-viable  trees  that  pose  a  threat 
to resident safety and infrastructure, and utilize 
USDA’s  iTree  program  to  address  carbon  and 
greenhouse  via  urban  trees  starting  in  early 
2018.

Lead Implementing Partners:
CoA  Department of City Planning, CoA  
Department of Parks & Recreation, CoA 
Department of Watershed Management

and under City management

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of acres of forested property purchased 

Funding: Fully Funded; CoA Tree Recompense 
Fund

•  # of trees planted on City-owned properties

Partner Spotlight

addresses 

federal  and 

Proctor Creek Stewardship Council
In  partnership  with 
local 
this  grassroots 
governmental  officials, 
community, 
organization 
infrastructure,  and  development  challenges 
in  the  Proctor  Creek  Watershed.  Their 
mission  is  to  restore,  revitalize,  and  protect 
the  ecological  health  of  the  Proctor  Creek 
Watershed Basin and the quality of life of all 
of its 52,000+ residents. Through field trips, 
skill-development  workshops,  community 
science  programs,  and  capacity  building 

initiatives,  the  Council  will  educate  and 
learn  from  groups  of  community  members 
about specific challenges in their own parts 
of  the    Watershed  and  Creek.  This  will,  in 
turn, increase overall community awareness, 
advance  advocacy  for  and  implementation 
of  green  infrastructure  projects,  and  equip 
residents  to  act  as  agents  of  change  for 
environment  justice  and  resilience  in  the 
Proctor Creek Watershed.

86

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Secondary Driver
Meets Basic Needs

Primary Driver
Provides & Enhances Natural & 
Manmade Assets

Action 3.5.1: Launch a restaurant water-efficiency pilot 
program for the City of Atlanta
Launch  a  Water  Efficiency  Restaurant  Certificate 
(WERC)  Program  pilot  for  100  restaurants,  of 
which at least 50 will be women/minority-owned 
and/or  in  underserved  neighborhoods.  Knowing 
that  the  city  has  the  nation’s  highest  water  and 
sewer rates, WERC, launching in the fall of 2017, will 
provide  restaurant  owners  with  five  measurable 
actions to reduce  water usage, including required 
replacement  of  specific  fixtures  (pre-rinse  spray 
valves,  toilets,  and  urinals)  with  WaterSense-
certified fixtures. Replacing a pre-rinse spray valve 
used  for  an  average  of  one  hour  per  day  would 
save  a  restaurant  163  gallons  of  water  per  day. 
These  actions  will  help  to  move  the  needle  on 
large  scale  water-efficiency  efforts  citywide  and 
help ensure adequate water supply for current and 
future Atlantans. WERC also will create workforce 
development  opportunities  by  hosting  training 
programs  for  local  youth  to  conduct  pre-  and 
post-installation  inspections  at  restaurants.  The 
skills  obtained  by  inspectors  in  the  program  will 
serve as a gateway to additional training and job 
opportunities in the plumbing and water treatment 
fields. The goal is to evolve this pilot program into 
a  regular  water-efficiency  program  within  the 
Department of Watershed Management.

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of WaterSense pre-rinse spray 
      valves installed
•  # of WaterSense toilets and 
      urinals installed
•  # of restaurants participating
•  # of gallons of water conserved
•  $ change in water bills
Funding: Fully Funded; 100 Resilient Cities 
and CoA Mayor’s Office of Resilience

Lead Implementing Partners:
CoA Mayor’s Office of Resilience, CoA 
Department of Watershed Management, 
Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning 
District, Georgia Restaurant Association 

Secondary Driver
Supports Livelihoods 
& Employment

Atlanta Tree Canopies. Photo 
Credit: City of Atlanta

87

VISION 3 TARGET 3.5

VISION 3 TARGET 3.5

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Ensures Continuity of Critical 
Services
Secondary Driver
Provides & Enhances Natural 
& Manmade Assets

Action 3.5.2:  Create a stormwater utility fee to develop and 
fund a comprehensive stormwater management program
Establish  a  stormwater  utility  fee  to  fund  the  City’s 
stormwater management plan, which is designed to reduce 
surface flooding, address aging infrastructure, and improve 
the  quality  of  water  in  our  streams.  This  initiative  will 
include funding projects identified in the City’s Watershed 
Improvement  Plans,  leveraging  partnerships  through  the 
Green Infrastructure Strategic Action Plan, and providing 
incentives for customers to install green infrastructure best 
management  practices  (BMP’s)  on  private  property  to 
help manage on-site stormwater runoff. The Department 
of Watershed Management has proposed a comprehensive 
Stormwater  Management  Program  to  be  supported  by 
a  sustainable  stormwater  utility  fee  established  through 
the standard practice of billing property owners based on 
the amount of impervious surface present on a property. 
The  program  will  be  modeled  after  a  combination  of 
national  best  practices  and  programs  from  neighboring 
jurisdictions.  Atlanta’s  stormwater  utility  fee  will  be 
designed  to  specifically  address  equity  concerns  by 
providing grant programs to ensure low-income residents 
are neither adversely affected by the cost of the fee nor 
unable to participate in BMP implementation programs. 

Lead Implementing Partners:
CoA Department of Watershed 
Management, CoA Mayor’s Office 
of Resilience, The Conservation 
Fund, American Rivers, West Atlanta 
Watershed Alliance 
Potential Metrics/Measures of 
Success:
•  Volume of pollutants captured 

by installed Green Infrastructure 
Best Management Practices 
(BMPs)

•  # of BMPs installed
•  # of flooding incidents citywide 
and at U.S. Federal Emergency 
Management Agency recognized 
flood-prone areas

•  $ collected through stormwater 

utility fee

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Meets Basic Needs

Secondary Driver
Ensures Continuity of 
Critical Services

Action 3.5.3: Increase use and access to solar energy by 2020 
through the creation of Solarize Atlanta
Collaborate  with  nonprofit  and  philanthropic  partners  to 
create  Solarize  Atlanta  in  2018.    Solarize  Atlanta  will  be  a 
community-based  solar  photovoltaic  group-purchasing 
program  that  makes  solar  installations  affordable  for 
residents, businesses, faith-based institutions, and nonprofits 
in the city. Distributing solar energy on rooftop and ground-
mounted  systems  throughout  the  city  can  offset  peak 
electricity demand while making solar more affordable and 
accessible to interested Atlantans. The solar installations will 
be  financed  using  either  a  direct  purchase  of  solar  panels 
through  Solarize  bulk  pricing  or  through  a  solar  energy 
procurement agreement, as authorized by the Georgia State 
Legislature  in  2015.  The  program  will  provide  free  town-
hall  style  education  and  workshop  sessions  open  to  the 
public.  Participants will  each  receive  a  free  solar  feasibility 
evaluation,  which  will  include  preliminary  site  design,  an 
energy  usage  profile,  and  financial  analysis.  The  Solarize 
program will enhance Atlanta’s resilience by providing more 
easily  affordable  renewable  energy,  which  helps  the  city 
meet its 100 percent clean energy transition goal by 2035. It 
also has the benefit of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 
decreasing our reliance on energy generated by fossil fuels. 
Additionally, the City of Atlanta Mayor’s Office of Resilience 
will  coordinate  with  the  Department  of  City  Planning  to 
streamline the City’s solar permitting process to make solar 
adoption more easily accessible to constituents.

Lead Implementing Partners:
Solar CrowdSource, Environment 
Georgia, Georgia Interfaith Power 
and Light, CoA Mayor’s Office 
of Resilience

Potential Metrics/Measures of 
Success:
•  # of residences, nonprofits, and 

      through Solarize
•  # of rooftop installations in 

Funding: Partially Funded; 
Program participants

businesses using solar energy

•  # of megawatts of solar 

capacity installed 

each sector

Partner Spotlight
Green Infrastructure Taskforce

In 2013, the City of Atlanta convened relevant 
City agencies, as well as partner groups, to 
promote  and  support  the  integration  of 
green  infrastructure  into  all  types  of  public 
infrastructure 
investments.  This  Green 
Infrastructure  Task  Force  has  developed 
a  Strategic  Action  Plan  to  address  the 
challenges  associated  with  managing 
stormwater  runoff  that  leads  to  flooding, 
degraded  water  quality,  and  property 
damage.  The  Plan,  which  the  Atlanta  City 
Council  unanimously  approved 
in  2017, 
suggests  actions  for  removing  institutional 
barriers to green infrastructure construction; 

88

increasing 
cost-effectiveness  of  green 
infrastructure;  and  engaging  multiple  City 
departments,  citizens,  developers,  and 
environmental groups in working towards the 
goal  of  reducing  stormwater  runoff  by  225 
million  gallons  annually.  Numerous  projects 
have  been  completed,  including  Southeast 
Atlanta  Permeable  Pavers,  Adair  Park  Rain 
Garden,  and  Historic  Fourth  Ward  Park. 
Upcoming  initiatives  include  Proctor  Creek 
Greenway, Boone Park West with the Atlanta 
Urban Ecology Center @ Proctor Creek, and 
Rodney Cook, Sr. Park.

Solar panels shading a parking lot in downtown Atlanta. 
Photo Credit: City of Atlanta. 

89

VISION 3 TARGET 3.5

VISION 3 TARGET 3.5

Secondary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & 
Engaged Communities
Lead Implementing Partners:
Groundswell, Partnership for Southern Equity, 
Georgia Watch, Southface Energy Institute, 
Enterprise Community Partners, Georgia Power

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of low-income households receiving EASP, 

HEIP, and ABT Program services
•  # of individuals participating in 
      educational workshops 
•  # of energy efficiency kit donation 
      sites established
•  # of low-income families receiving energy 

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Primary Driver
Meets Basic Needs

Action 3.5.4: Lift the energy burden on 10 percent of 
Atlanta households
Support the implementation of Georgia Power’s 
Energy  Assessment  and  Solutions  Program 
(EASP),  Home  Energy  Improvement  Program 
(HEIP), and the Automated Benchmarking Tool 
(ABT)  with  local  Georgia  coalition  partners 
in  the  national  Energy  Efficiency  for All  (EEFA) 
initiative. EEFA is dedicated to linking the energy 
and  housing  sectors  together  in  order  to  tap 
the benefits of energy efficiency for millions of 
low-income  families.  Georgia  Power  currently 
offers two energy efficiency incentive programs 
designed  to  help  low-income  residents  and 
building  owners  achieve  energy  savings  and 
lower  utility  bills,  as  well  as  a  third  program 
that  provides  whole-building  energy  data  and 
benchmarking  capability.  These  programs:  (1) 
encourage  participation  in  Georgia  Power’s 
new  EASP  that  provides  free  home  energy 
assessments, weatherization, direct-install, and 
whole-house  energy  efficiency  improvements 
for  eligible 
low-income  single  family  and 
multifamily  owners  and  renters;  (2)  encourage 
multifamily  affordable  housing  participation 
in  Georgia  Power’s  HEIP,  which  provides 
assessments  and  incentives  for  individual  and 
whole-house  energy  efficiency  improvements; 
and (3) support the use of and provide technical 
assistance for Georgia Power’s new Automated 
Benchmarking Tool (ABT), which provides whole-
building  data  and  benchmarking.  The  City  of 
Atlanta  Mayor’s  Office  of  Resilience  will  also 
promote participation in EEFA partner Georgia 
Watch’s  “How  to  Save  Money  on  Your  Power 
Bills”  workshops  and  EEFA  coalition  Energy-
Equity  Forums,  which  provide  information  on 
energy  systems  and  actions  to  help  residents 
save  energy  and  money  through  simple  steps 
they can take at home. Additionally, the City will 
support Georgia Watch in promoting an Energy 
Efficiency Kit Donation Program. Georgia Watch 
will work with retail establishments and Georgia 
Power’s online marketplace to set up collection 
sites  asking  shoppers  to  purchase  items  as 
donations  to  assemble  energy  efficiency  and 
weatherization  kits,  which  will  be  distributed 
to 
low-income  homes  through  community 
outreach channels starting in Spring 2018.

efficiency kits

Funding: Partially Funded; Georgia Power (HEIP 
and EASP funded as filed with and approved 
by the Georgia Public Service Commission and 
allocated statewide), The Energy Foundation,  
JPB Foundation

90

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Action 3.5.5: Host a resilient infrastructure design 
competition in 2018
Conduct a design competition among Atlanta-
based colleges and universities to transform Ted 
Turner Drive into a national example for resilient 
street design. The winning projects may include 
features like green infrastructure, bicycle lanes, 
permeable  paving  materials,  solar  energy,  and 
electric vehicle charging, and must incorporate 
a  design-sensitivity to the cultural history of the 
community.  As  Ted  Turner  Drive  revitalization 
has already been identified for funding through 
the  City’s  T-SPLOST,  this  competition  presents 
an  opportunity  to 
leverage  these  planned 
improvements  to  include  additional  resilience 
measures. The City will implement all or portions 
of  the  winning  design  into  the  final  scope  of 
work for the Ted Turner Drive project, making it 
a model of resilience for other projects around 
the city and the world.

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of competing school teams
•  Gallons of stormwater diverted
• 
•  # of pedestrians and bikers per year
•  Reductions in vehicle, pedestrian, and 

lbs of Carbon Dioxide sequestered

Primary Driver
Provides & Enhances Natural & 
Manmade Assets
Secondary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders

Lead Implementing Partners:
Renew Atlanta, CoA Department of Parks and 
Recreation, Local colleges and universities

bicycle accidents

Funding: Fully Funded; Turner Enterprises, 
T-SPLOST, Rebuild by Design

Park(ing) Day 2017 in Downtown Atlanta. Photo Credit: 
Central Atlanta Progress

91

VISION 3 SHARED INSPIRATION

VISION 3: SHARED 
INSPIRATION FROM 
THE 100RC GLOBAL 
NETWORK

ACTION 3.3.1: 
Boulder is conducting a non-
traditional food security assessment 
to ensure the resilience of the local 
food system.

ACTION 3.1.4: 
San Francisco is rapidly rehousing homeless San 
Franciscans following natural disasters.

ACTION 3.1.5: 
Boston is collecting, analyzing, and sharing 
available City data to advance equity.

ACTION 3.4.1: 
Santa Fe Parque del Norte Project is recovering 
and revitalizing 80 hectares of land formerly 
used as a landfill site, the municipal Botanical 
Garden, and several derelict greenspaces. 

ACTION 3.2.1: 
Santiago Mobility Pillar is planning and 
promoting an inter-modal transport system 
with a regional vision.

92

ACTION 3.4.2: 
Dakar is collaborating with the 
private sector to reinstate public 
greenspaces in the City.

ACTION 3.5.4:
Dakar is promoting end user 
awareness and adoption of energy-
saving opportunities.

VISION 3 SHARED INSPIRATION

ACTION 3.2.1: 
Thessaloniki is building an 
integrated resilient mobility 
system.

ACTION 3.3.2: 
Bangkok is taking 
an integrated 
and participatory 
approach to 
promoting urban 
agriculture and 
sustainable farming 
practices on 
preserved farm land 
in the city. 

ACTION 3.4.2: 
Bristol is developing a 
high level assessment 
of the financial value of 
greenspaces across the 
city to assist with future 
investment decisions. 

ACTION 3.4.3: 
Melbourne local councils, water authorities, community groups, and 
regional collaborations are undertaking urban greening and revegetation 
projects.

93

“

The greatness of a community is 
most accurately measured by the 

compassionate actions of its members.

- Coretta Scott King

 “

VISION

04

DESIGN OUR 
SYSTEMS TO 
REFLECT OUR 
VALUES

Adapt Atlanta’s civic systems to 
enable the City to become a leader 
in equity, sustainability, 
and resilience.

Atlanta City Hall. Photo Credit: Tami Chappell

94

95

VISION 04

DESIGN OUR SYSTEMS TO 
REFLECT OUR VALUES 

We envision a region that works everyday to ensure equity, encourage dynamic civic engagement, 
secure sustainability outcomes, improve public safety, and become a leader in airport resilience. 
With these Actions, Atlanta has the opportunity to update its city and regional infrastructure to 
align with these values and become a region that works for its residents, as well as a model for cities 
globally.

The  city  and  region  rely  on  formal  and  informal  policies  and  programs  that  have  been 
added  over  decades  without  always  effectively  coordinating  to  prevent  duplication  of 
work  and  services.  This  situation  is  not  uncommon  in  large  municipal  governments, 
where departments may fail to align work being done on the same city block or leverage 
multiple resources allocated to a neighborhood to maximize benefits. Problems with this 
piecemeal  process  are  exacerbated  by  the  persistent  stress  of  aging  infrastructure,  as 
different City departments work to make critical upgrades to our combined sewer overflow 
system,traffic control systems, and cracked sidewalks. Through these Actions, Atlanta can 
align programs across all agencies and organizations to best support all residents.

VISION 4 TARGET OVERVIEW

Vision 04:
Target Overview

TARGET 4.1

TARGET 4.2

0   -

30,0 0

  35,000 RE
 311

Q

U

E

S

T

S

 

P
E
R

  M
ONTH

Adapt and expand City systems to promote resilience planning 
by 2022. 
The  City  will  work  internally  to  adapt  and  expand  existing  processes 
and  systems  to  ensure  equity  and  integrate  resilience-thinking  by  2022. 
The  City  has  over  20  Departments  and 17  Executive  Offices  ,  as  well  as 
numerous  projects,  initiatives,  boards,  and  commissions.  While  equity- 
and  resilience-thinking    may  exist  in  decision-making  informally  or  vary 
across departments, this effort will align all City officials to ensure a more 
coordinated and efficient approach to planning and making investments 
in the future. Action 4.1.1 ensures equity in public investments. Action 4.1.2 
improves  coordination  on  joint  infrastructure  investments.  Action  4.1.3 
improves  the  City’s  community  outreach  process. Action  4.1.4  leverages 
innovative technology to improve the City’s tracking of and responsiveness 
to  stormwater  flooding  caused  by  our  combined  sewer  overflow  system 
and  aging  infrastructure.  Action  4.1.5  improves  communication  and 
coordination  with  Atlanta  Public  Schools,  other  regional  public  school 
systems, and higher education institutions. Action 4.1.6 ensures the use of 
an equity lens in all projects and practices through open trainings.

Support policies and systems to increase civic participation from 
Metro Atlantans.
The City will work with local partners to support policies and re-envision 
systems  to  increase  civic  participation  across  Metro Atlanta. Today,  two 
examples of channels for civic participation include the Atlanta-Fulton Public 
Library system, which supports 34 local branches, and Atlanta’s 311 help line, 
which receives between 30,000 to 35,000 requests per month. Improving 
these systems and others to be more accessible and user-friendly will provide 
new avenues for civic participation for hundreds of thousands of Atlantans 
each year. While there are a wide range of civic participation platforms in 
Atlanta, many no longer seem to meet their potential for bringing residents 
together and giving the community a voice. These actions aim to do just 
that. Action 4.2.1 opens a resilience lab to support community members 
in  coming  together  to  address  local  challenges.  Action  4.2.2  leverages 
the  public  library  system  as  a  community  and  civic  engagement  space. 
Action 4.2.3 restructures the City’s Neighborhood Planning Unit system to 
provide  a  better  conduit  between  residents  and  decision-makers. Action 
4.2.4 gives residents a direct vote over a portion of the City budget. Action 
4.2.5 engages residents through a crowdsource database to improve City 
emergency response. Action 4.2.6 develops a public-facing scorecard to hold 
agencies and organizations accountable for equity and resilience. Action 
4.2.7 brings together interfaith organizations to improve communication 
and coordination among diverse faith communities in Atlanta.

96

97

VISION 4 TARGET OVERVIEW

TARGET 4.3

100%
clean
energy by
2035

TARGET 4.4

31%

of GA population identify as 

Black 

70%

of Black youth 

admissions for criminal 

TARGET 4.5

60,000 
JOBS 

$34.8
BILLION 

A
T
L

A
T
L

98
98

Achieve 100 percent use of clean energy citywide by 2035. 
This year, Atlanta  committed  to  transition  to 100  percent  clean  energy 
citywide by the year 2035. Included within this target is a commitment 
to  transition  to  100  percent  clean  energy  for  municipal  operations  by 
2025, which covers energy consumption at City-owned buildings, water 
and  wastewater  treatment  plants,  and  the  Hartsfield-Jackson  Atlanta 
International  Airport.  The  City  is  undertaking  a  number  of  innovative 
approaches to meet this goal, including entering into an energy savings 
performance  contract  to  retrofit  approximately 100  municipal  facilities 
for  energy  and  water  efficiency,  developing  a  property  assessed  clean 
energy  (PACE)  financing  program  for  energy  efficiency  and  renewable 
energy upgrades to the private building stock, making Atlanta a national 
leader in the U.S. Department of Energy’s Better Buildings Challenge, and 
installing solar on Atlanta City facilities.

Improve public safety and community preparedness by 
strengthening community cohesion and program evaluation. 
Atlanta  will  improve  public  safety  and  community  preparedness  by 
strengthening  community  cohesion  through  community-level  disaster 
trainings, greater engagement with the local police force, and additional 
after-school youth  programs  and  mentorship  opportunities. Across  the 
country,  cities  are  looking  for  solutions  to  address  increasing  tension 
between  local  communities  and  police  forces,  high youth  incarceration 
and detention rates, and rising instances of natural disasters. According 
to  the  Georgia  Department  of  Juvenile  Justice,  Black  youth  make  up 
over  70  percent  of  total  admissions  for  criminal  offenses,  despite  living 
in a State where only 31 percent of the population identifies as Black. The 
Actions  under  this  Target  provide  innovative  approaches  to  addressing 
these challenges. Action 4.4.1 offers new opportunities for Atlanta Police 
to volunteer and mentor local youth. Action 4.4.2 establishes community 
centers to support LGBTQ+ youth in underserved neighborhoods. Action 
4.4.3 evaluates the success of the @Promise Youth Center in mitigating 
juvenile  detention.  Action  4.4.4  expands  local  community  disaster 
preparedness training and education programs.

Promote  Hartsfield-Jackson  Atlanta 
International  Airport  as 
a  national  model  for  resilience,  sustainability,  and  workforce 
development by 2025.
The City of Atlanta, Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, and 
the local improvement district will work to showcase the Airport as a global 
model for resilience, sustainability, and workforce development. Atlanta is 
home to the world’s most traveled airport, providing over 60,000 jobs and 
contributing over $34.8 billion in economic impact. As such, the Airport is 
both a major focus for resilience as well as for employment opportunities. 
Action 4.5.1 creates a hub for innovators to explore new ways of increasing 
airport resilience. Action 4.5.2 establishes policies to ensure the Airport 
provides  adequate  access  and workforce  development  opportunities  to 
low-income workers.

Vision 04:
Action Launch 
Dates

2016

Q3

Q4

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4

Q1

Q2

Q3

2017

ACTION 4.1.4
Improve responsiveness to 
Stormwater Flooding
ACTION 4.4.3
Track and evaluate @Promise Youth 
Center programming

2018

ACTION 4.1.3
Improve the City’s community 
outreach processes to improve 
efficacy and promote transparency
ACTION 4.2.3
Audit Atlanta’s Neighborhood 
Planning Units

2019

ACTION 4.1.6
Expand the Equity In Sustainability 
training program and develop an 
Equity Strategy among sustainability 
practitioners by 2022
ACTION 4.4.1 
Increase the capacity of community 
police mentorship programs
ACTION 4.4.2
Establish community centers to 
support LGBTQ+ youth in underserved 
neighborhoods by 2022
ACTION 4.2.2
Strengthen community disaster 
preparedness and response by 2021
ACTION 4.2.6
Create an Equity and 
Resilience Scorecard

VISION 4 ACTION TIMELINE

ACTION 4.5.2
Make the world’s most traveled 
airport a world-class leader in 
providing livable wage, public 
transportation accessible jobs

ACTION 4.2.1 
Create a community resource center 
that uses design, art, data, media, 
and technology to help residents 
address local issues and improve 
resilience
ACTION 4.2.5
Leverage crowdsourced data to 
improve City systems 

ACTION 4.1.1
Create a City-investment checklist to 
ensure equity and resilience in public 
investments
ACTION 4.1.5
Create a liaison position within the 
City of Atlanta by 2020 that focuses 
on improving engagement with 
education organizations in the City

ACTION 4.2.7
Develop Interfaith Coalition and 
resilience baseline

ACTION 4.1.2
Establish a system and evaluation 
process for joint-infrastructure 
investments by 2020

ACTION 4.3.1
Create and implement a strategy for 
the City to use 100 percent 
clean energy
ACTION 4.5.1
Launch an Airport Resiliency and 
Sustainability Innovation Center 
by 2023
ACTION 4.2.4
Launch a Participatory Budgeting 
pilot by 2020
ACTION 4.4.4
Strengthen community disaster 
preparedness and response by 2021

99

VISION 4 TARGET 4.1

VISION 4 TARGET 4.1

investments,  particularly 

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Action 4.1.1: Create a City investment checklist to ensure 
equity and resilience in public investments 
Develop an internal and external checklist to be put 
into operation starting in  City of Atlanta’s Fiscal Year 
2019 that will be used to assess the current condition 
of  public  spaces  across  Atlanta  neighborhoods  to 
guide  future  public 
in 
the  transportation  sector,  and  to  enhance  fiscal 
responsibility  in  public  spending  management.  To 
date, several neighborhoods continually benefit from 
significant  public  realm  improvements  while  others 
lack  basic  infrastructure  like  continuous  sidewalks. 
This  baseline  assessment  tool  will  highlight  public 
realm 
increase  accountability  and 
transparency  in  decision-making  for  public  realm 
investments  while  fostering  integrated  planning, 
and demonstrate the City’s commitment to equity. 
The result is a built infrastructure system that aligns 
infrastructure  investment  with  equity  assessments 
to ensure that all communities have access to basic 
infrastructure  and  affordable  transit  options  across 
the city.

Primary Driver
Fosters Long-Term & Integrated  
Planning
Secondary Driver
Promotes Leadership & Effective 
Management 
Secondary Driver
Ensures Continuity of Critical 
Services

Lead Implementing Partners: 
CoA Chief Equity Officer, Renew Atlanta, 
CoA Department of Finance 

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # adopted changes in the annual 

•  # of completed projects that fit within 

the framework

inequalities, 

budget

•  # of sidewalk, greenspace, road, and 
green infrastructure installations and/
or improvements, as determined by an 
annual resilience report card related to 
public investment

implement  a 

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Action 4.1.2: Establish a system and evaluation process for 
joint infrastructure investments by 2020
system  and 
Develop  and 
evaluation approach to City joint infrastructure 
investments that accounts for the benefits and 
efficiencies  of  coordinated  investments  across 
City  departments  and  that  could  be  funded 
through  a  coordinated  capital  plan,  similar  to 
that  executed  under  the  Renew Atlanta  Bond 
Program.  This  process  will  promote  long-term 
effectiveness and efficiency across operational 
departments.  Under  the 
leadership  of  a 
proposed  City  Joint  Infrastructure  Investment 
Committee, program and project investments 
will  be  evaluated,  prioritized,  and  approved 
utilizing  specific  criteria  designed  to  validate: 
(1)  an  efficient  use  of  taxpayer  dollars,  (2) 
a  consistent  and  measurable  approach  to 
planning and budgeting for joint infrastructure 
investments  and 
sustained  maintenance 
programs, and (3) a prioritization of investments 
that increase resilience and equity.

Primary Driver
Fosters Long-Term & Integrated  
Planning
Secondary Driver
Promotes Leadership & Effective 
Management 

Lead Implementing Partners: 
CoA Mayor’s Office of Innovation and Delivery, 
All City general fund departments, Atlanta 
City Council, Local, state, federal grant funding 
agencies

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of new cross-departmental programs 

•  $ change in short-term and long-term 

•  $ change in long-term capital and 

operating budgets

implemented

repair costs

Funding: Partially Funded; CoA Mayor’s 
Office of Resilience, T-SPLOST

Partner Spotlight

SmartATL

SmartATL  develops  and  employs  data 
analysis  tools  to  enable  the  city,  citizens, 
and  businesses  to  gain  actionable  insights 
that will improve the livability of the city and 
foster  economic  growth  by  leveraging  the 
Internet of Things (IoT) and big data analytics 
capability. The  five  core  pillars  of  SmartATL 
—  mobility,  public  safety,  environment,  City 
operations efficiency, and public and business 
engagement  --  as  well  as  the  cross-pillar 
focus  areas  of  equity  and  resilience  align 
well  with  Resilient  Atlanta.  By  ensuring  full 
integration of SmartATL technology and data 
tools with resilience efforts, implementation 

of  Atlanta’s  resilience  actions  will  not  only 
result  in  cost-savings  and  cost-avoidance 
but  also  create  numerous  benefits  across 
multiple City systems and departments. 
One  SmartATL  project,  the  North  Avenue 
Corridor  Demonstration,  was  launched  in 
September 2017. The Demonstration project 
will establish the first-ever high-speed public 
WIFI  on  an  Atlanta  city  corridor,  create  a 
comprehensive and scalable smart city data 
platform,  demonstrate  autonomous  vehicle 
capability  including  interaction  with  city 
infrastructure, and deploy over 100 connected 
devices and sensors on North Avenue.

101

Community feedback session for downtown Atlanta 
development. Photo Credit: Central Atlanta Progress

100

VISION 4 TARGET 4.1

VISION 4 TARGET 4.1

Partner Spotlight

Cyber Security

Atlanta, like many other cities, is increasingly 
relying on smart technology to streamline and 
enhance  City  services  using  real-time  data. 
These  smart  systems  combine  hardware, 
software, and geospatial analytics to make 
our  communities  more  digitally  connected 
and  improve  our  quality  of  life.  However, 
as  our  smart  infrastructure  grows,  so  does 
the  risk  of  cybersecurity  breaches.  Atlanta 
is  working  to  improve  its  overall  security 
posture by building a defensible information 
security program that improves our threat- 
and  vulnerability-management  capabilities 
for both information and supervisory control 
and data acquisition (SCADA) systems. With 
the stakes for protecting digital foundations 
high,  Atlanta  has  made  cybersecurity  a 
priority by adopting the following measures: 
Requiring  mandatory  security  awareness 
training as a part of the Information Security 

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Lead Implementing Partners: 
CoA Mayor’s Office of Communications, CoA  
Office of Constituent Services, CoA 311

Primary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range 
of Stakeholders
Secondary Driver
Promotes Leadership and 
Effective Management

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  of City of Atlanta staff trained
•  # of complaints via 311
•  % change in approval ratings of 311 
      and city staff

Action 4.1.3: Improve the City’s community outreach 
processes to improve efficacy and promote transparency
Audit  current  City  of  Atlanta  community 
outreach and communication policies to develop 
a  new  strategy  to  increase  transparency  and 
consistency  in  communication  and  outreach 
across  City  departments  by  2020.  According  to 
data  collected  throughout  the  Resilient  Atlanta 
Strategy  development  process,  citizens  cited 
communication  and 
collaboration  among 
internal stakeholders,  as well as between the City 
and  the  community,  as  a  weakness  that  needs 
to  be  addressed  to  improve Atlanta’s  resilience. 
The  audit  and  subsequent  implementation  of 
a  new  outreach  and  communications  policy 
would  coincide  with  the  new  2018  Mayoral 
administration  and  City  Council.  Tools  such  as 
the Atlanta Community Engagement Playbook, a 
shared outreach calendar, and communications 
trainings  could  all  be  utilized  to  execute  the 
new  strategy. A  new  culture  around  community 
outreach will provide a solid foundation to support 
other strategic initiatives.
Action 4.1.4: Improve responsiveness to stormwater flooding
The  City  of Atlanta’s  Department  of Watershed 
Management  (DWM)  is  developing  a  Smart 
H2O platform within a secure, permission-based 
system  designed  to  capture  real-time  data  and 
provide  greater  insight  into  the  performance  of 
the  water  system.  Severe  stormwater  events 
place  significant  pressure  on  already  stressed 
infrastructure. The Smart H2O platform will allow 
the DWM to provide users and stakeholders that 
are part of the incident management team with 
real time information, including location, pictures, 
and damage assessments to alert first responders. 
Through 
integration  of  existing  WebEOC 
technology into the Smart H2O platform, this suite 
of  information,  combined  with  historic  data  of 
severely impacted areas, provides first responders 
with  situational  awareness  to  most  effectively 
manage  severe  weather  incidents.  Furthermore, 
this program will function as a repository for data 
that can be used to identify potential flood and 
drought mitigation infrastructure projects.

Lead Implementing Partners: 
CoA Department of Watershed Management, 
CoA Mayor’s Office of Emergency 
Preparedness, Atlanta-Fulton County 
Emergency Management Agency 
Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of potential projects identified resulting 
in reduction of legacy stormwater projects

Primary Driver
Provides & Enhances Natural & 
Manmade Assets

Secondary Driver
Ensures Continuity of Critical Services

•  # of projects identified and included in 

•  # of projects identified for FEMA pre-

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

annual budgeting cycle

disaster mitigation funding 

102

Funding: Partially Funded; CoA “SWIT”

Management System (ISMS) program, which 
includes education on topics such as phishing, 
password  protection,  and  recognizing  and 
reporting  security  incidents  for  all  City  of 
Atlanta employees; 
•  Planning  and 

implementing  multiple 
cyber  security  measures  for    vital  utility 
systems; 

•  Coordinating  with  Georgia  Institute  of 
Technology and the Georgia Department 
of Transportation  to  add  multiple  layers 
of  cybersecurity  to  our  traffic  signal 
infrastructure; and

•  Acquiring  the  services  of  a  Managed 
Security Service Provider (MSSP) to help 
assist  with  providing  a  cost-effective, 
robust 
enabling 
24x7x365 support services of highly skilled 
network security experts. 

solution, 

security 

Community Resilient Atlanta community engagement 
session. Photo Credit: City of Atlanta

103

VISION 4 TARGET 4.1

VISION 4 TARGET 4.1

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Action 4.1.5: Create a liaison position within the City of 
Atlanta by 2020 that focuses on improving engagement with 
education organizations in the city
Create  an  education 
liaison  to  strengthen 
collaboration  and  coordination  of  resources 
between  the  City  and  Atlanta  Public  Schools, 
as  well  as  with  higher  education  institutions, 
NGO  education  partners,  and  surrounding 
municipalities. This will help the City determine 
how  to  better  support  these  organizations’ 
efforts,  with  a  particular  focus  on    improving 
education equity and supporting disadvantaged 
communities.  Modeled  after  a  successful 
Nashville program, this educational liaison could 
be tasked with expanding Pre-K and supporting 
after-school programming, recycling initiatives, 
school gardens, and capital improvements.

Primary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range 
of Stakeholders
Secondary Driver
Fosters Long-Term & 
Integrated  Planning

Lead Implementing Partners: 
CoA Mayor’s Office, Atlanta Public Schools

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of projects and programs supported and/

or improved by the liaison position

•  #of community events attended by the 

education liaison

•  # of slots on the waiting list for Pre-K
•  % increase in after-school programming 
•  % increase in recycling initiatives and 

presentations by Atlanta’s Recycling team

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Primary Driver
Promotes Leadership & 
Effective Management 
Secondary Driver
Provides & Enhances Natural 
& Manmade Assets

Action 4.1.6: Expand the Equity In Sustainability training 
program and develop an Equity Strategy among sustainability 
practitioners by 2022
Expand  the  Equity  in  Sustainability  Training 
program, developed by the Urban Sustainability 
in  partnership  with 
Directors  Network 
the  Center  for  Social 
Inclusion,  for  both 
government employees and non-governmental 
partners.  Launched  in  2015,  the  program  is  a 
professional development program that teaches 
sustainability directors, staff, and partners about 
tools  and  best  practices  for  adding  a  racial 
equity lens to sustainability practices. The goal is 
to provide valuable training for communicating 
about racial equity, team building, and applying 
proven  equity  tools,  as  well  as  to  engage  an 
on-going core group of practitioners to embed 
an equity lens in all projects and practices. The 
training is designed to be a five-part series that 
consists  of  a  holistic  curriculum  of  webinars, 
videos, and practice guides. The City of Atlanta 
Mayor’s  Office  of  Resilience  hosted  the  first 
training  with  staff  and  partners  in  August 
2017,  which 
included  over  20  participants 
representing  seven  organizations.  The  Office 
of Resilience will expand the training efforts to 
engage  more  external  partner  organizations 
and  government  counterparts  responsible  for 
executing  sustainability 
initiatives.  Trainings 
and coalition convenings would occur quarterly 
starting  in  2018  to  engage  training  alumni  in 
the  development  and  implementation  of  joint 
equity projects and policies.

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of trainings
•  # of attendees at trainings
•  # of projects  and policies implemented as 
result of trainings and coalition convenings

Lead Implementing Partners: 
CoA Mayor’s Office of Resilience, CoA Chief 
Equity Officer

Funding: Partially Funded; CoA Mayor’s Office 
of Resilience

•  # of unique neighborhoods receiving 

programming

Photo Credit: Mr.Carmichae1

104
104

PARCC Partners Tour.  Photo Credit: Transformation Alliance 
and Georgia STAND-UP

105

VISION 4 TARGET 4.2

VISION 4 TARGET 4.2

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Empowers a Broad 
Range of Stakeholders
Secondary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & 
Engaged Communities
Lead Implementing Partners: 
Georgia Institute of Technology, 
CoA Mayor’s Office of Resilience

Action 4.2.1: Create a community resource center that uses 
design, art, data, media, and technology to help residents 
address local issues and improve resilience 
Provide  space  and  technical  assistance  to  help  communities 
address  local  resilience  challenges  using  design,  art,  data, 
media, and technology, and implement the solutions developed 
by the community. The resource center, the Atlanta Resilience, 
Equity,  and  Design  Collective  (RED),  will  leverage  existing 
community  partnerships  and  city  organizations  to  provide 
space  and  guide  programming  development.  RED,  which 
will initially be embedded in one of Atlanta’s most distressed 
neighborhoods,  will  launch  a  pilot  site  in  early  2018.  All 
programming and technical assistance will be geared towards 
meeting  the  needs  of  the  host  community  for  at  least  6-12 
months. RED will collaborate with the Atlanta City Studio to 
amplify community-based work, with the Atlanta City Studio 
focusing  on  urban  planning,  design,  and  associated  policies 
and RED focusing on tactical creative projects in communities. 
The  goal  of  RED  will  be  to  build  capacity  in  communities, 
produce civic infrastructure for change and resilience, employ 
community  members  at  RED,  and  implement  solutions  to 
improve resilience on a community level. Additionally, RED will 
offer technical services to support other Actions in the Strategy. 
Potential  equity  issues  to  be  addressed  in  the  community 
with  the  assistance  of  RED  include  housing,  environmental 
stewardship,  economic  development,  and  food  access. After 
building capacity in the initial community, RED will expand to 
offer services to other communities in need. RED also will seek 
to develop a consortium to allow students from colleges and 
universities to support the Collective.

Potential Metrics/Measures of 
Success:
•  # of residents attending 
programming at the Lab

Funding: Partially Funded; 
Georgia Institute of Technology

policies introduced as a 
result of the Lab

•  # of solutions derived from 

•  # of policy changes or new 

members hired at the Lab

•  # of local community 

work at the Lab

Community Convo at CCI. Photo Credit: City of Atlanta

106
106

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & E
ngaged Communities
Secondary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range 
of Stakeholders

Action 4.2.2: Re-envision Public Libraries to become focal 
points of community engagement and sustainability by 2019
Collaborate with regional public library systems 
to leverage current and new programming in 
an effort to rebrand libraries beyond a place 
to  house  books.  Libraries  are  well  located 
and  accessible  in  communities  throughout 
Metro  Atlanta.  Their  relationship  to  the 
community and the services they offer need to 
be reinforced and strengthened to transform 
libraries  into  a  comprehensive  community 
resource.  Libraries  represent  a  safe  space 
that  not  only  provides  access  to  technology, 
education,  and  other  support  services  but 
also  a  space  to  gather  and  promote  social 
connectivity. New programming could include: 
a  yearlong  one-book  program  to  promote 
shared  conversations  across  communities, 
ages, and races; equipping libraries to become 
cooling centers during extreme heat events; or 
providing seed libraries to support 
local growers.

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of library visitors
•  # of visitors accessing new programming 
•  # of members/ “local library 
      friends” organizations 

Lead Implementing Partners: 
Regional County Public Library Systems

Funding: Partially Funded; Public libraries 

Action 4.2.3: Audit Atlanta’s Neighborhood Planning Units

Conduct  an  audit  of  the  City  of  Atlanta’s 
Neighborhood Planning Unit (NPU) system in 
2018 to ensure that the NPUS are adequately 
enabling  neighborhood 
input  as  well  as 
tailoring public policies to the neighborhood. 
Established in 1974 to provide an opportunity for 
citizens to actively participate in the execution 
of  the  City’s  Comprehensive  Development 
Plan, NPUs are citizen advisory councils that 
make  recommendations  to  the  Mayor  and 
City  Council  on  zoning,  land  use,  and  other 
planning issues. The city is divided into 25 NPUs 
spanning all 242 Atlanta neighborhoods.  The 
system  is  a valuable  asset  that  serves  as  an 
avenue for the City to provide information to its 
residents and enable residents to inform policy 
from a neighborhood level, but it is arguably 
not  currently  maximizing  its  potential.  The 
results of the audit will be used to revitalize the 
structure of NPUs and implement changes by 
2019 that promote more meaningful 
civic participation.

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range of Stakeholders

Secondary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & 
Engaged Communities
Secondary Driver
Promotes Leadership & 
Effective Management 

Lead Implementing Partners: 
CoA Department of City Planning, CoA  Mayor’s 
Office of Innovation and Performance

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  Changes to the NPU system as a result of the 

audit

•  # of residents attending NPU meetings
•  # of residents participating in NPU leadership
• 
Increase in satisfaction with the NPU system
Funding: Partially Funded; Existing CoA budgets

107

VISION 4 TARGET 4.2

VISION 4 TARGET 4.2

Action 4.2.4: Launch a Participatory Budgeting pilot by 2020

Action 4.2.6: Create an Equity and Resilience Scorecard 

Select a portion of the City of Atlanta municipal 
budget  and  open  it  for  public  input.  Citizens 
often feel a lack of influence in the planning and 
allocation of local resources, leading to a lack 
of  trust  of  government  officials.  Participatory 
Budgeting  is  a  democratic  process  in  which 
community  members  directly  decide  how 
to  spend  part  of  a  public  budget.  Currently, 
the City of Atlanta offers the Atlanta Budget 
Explorer  tool  and  hosts  interactive  budget 
meetings online to close the information gap 
and promote transparency. With the support of 
community engagement and budget experts, 
the  City  would  expand  these  efforts  and 
implement a Participatory Budgeting pilot. The 
pilot  will  make  the  budget  more  transparent 
and  accessible  to  citizens,  as  well  as  provide 
information sessions for citizens on the overall 
budget  and  process.  The  pilot  will  become 
a  model  for  a 
longer-term  Participatory 
Budgeting program to be adopted by the City 
and neighboring jurisdictions.

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range 
of Stakeholders
Secondary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & Engaged 
Communities
Secondary Driver
Promotes Leadership & Effective 
Management 

Lead Implementing Partners: 
CoA  Office of Budget & Fiscal Policy, CoA 
Mayor’s Office of Innovation and Performance
Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of participants visiting online budget 

information site 

•  # of in-person inquiries at City Hall
•  # of calls to 311 to inquire
•  # of participants voting in use of funds 
Funding: Fully Funded; Existing CoA budgets

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Primary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders

Action 4.2.5: Leverage crowdsourced data to improve 
City systems
Leverage technology through a crowdsource 
application  and  the  City’s  311  Customer 
Service social media platform that will enable 
residents  to  provide  real-time  notifications 
to  the  City  resulting  in  immediate  service 
requests  and  deployment  of 
services, 
starting  in  2018.  Resident  satisfaction  is 
paramount  to  ensuring  overall  alignment 
with  the  City’s  operational  strategies  and 
investments 
in  infrastructure  services.  In 
the  2017  City  Annual  Satisfaction  Survey, 
public perception and reception around City 
services  and  overall  infrastructure  improved 
by  five  percent  from 2016, with  some  areas 
improving  greater  than  10  percent.  These 
technological  improvements  will  not  only 
increase  the  efficacy  of  City  systems  but 
also will allow residents to engage in overall 
resilience  efforts.  Additionally,  the  data 
collected  from  these  requests  will  inform 
future  programming  and  prioritization  of 
infrastructure projects.  

Lead Implementing Partners: 
CoA Mayor’s Office of Emergency Preparedness, 
CoA Atlanta 311, Georgia Institute of Technology 
Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  Service request response times
•  # of data requests for future 
•  budgetary planning
•  # of notifications from the crowdsource 

Secondary Driver
Fosters Long-Term & Integrated  Planning

•  City Annual Satisfaction Survey

application

Develop a set of criteria that allows the public 
to  evaluate  projects,  organizations,  and 
neighborhoods on their ability to address equity 
and  resilience  by  2019.  The  scorecard  will  be 
used  as  a  self-reporting  mechanism  between 
organizations and the public  as well as a tool to 
inform future investment decisions. The tool will 
help  citizens  hold  organizations  accountable 
while  also  providing  parameters  to  compare 
entities  based  on  a  universal  set  of  criteria. 
Promoting equity and resilience scores as seals 
of approval can encourage groups to formally 
integrate  values  associated  with  equity-  and 
resilience-thinking  into  every  aspect  of  their 
work. The City will be a leader in adopting the 
scorecard  approach  by  publishing  a  yearly 
report detailing the City’s equity and resilience 
efforts and progress.

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Fosters Long-Term & 
Integrated  Planning
Secondary Driver
Promotes Leadership & 
Effective Management 

Lead Implementing Partners: 
CoA SmartATL, CoA  Mayor’s Office of 
Resilience, CoA Chief Equity Officer, Invest 
Atlanta

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of residents and organizations utilizing 

the scorecard tool 

•  # of policy changes as a result of scorecard
•  $ change in revenue and investment due to 

scorecard results

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Primary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & 
Engaged Communities 
Secondary Driver
Promotes Leadership & 
Effective Management 

Action 4.2.7: Develop an Interfaith Coalition and 
resilience baseline
Promote  the  development  of  an 
Interfaith 
Coalition  to  improve  the  resilience  dividend 
of  Metro  Atlanta  faith-based  organizations 
through  coordinated  community  outreach 
efforts and shared goals. Faith is an integral part 
of  the  fabric  of    Atlanta’s  history,  responsible 
for mobilizing the Civil Rights Movement in the 
1960’s. The three largest interfaith organizations 
in  Atlanta  are  actively  engaged  in  a  Strategic 
Restructuring  process  that  may  lead  to  the 
merging  of  the  three  organizations  into  one 
leading  Atlanta  interfaith  organization.  The 
organizations  bring  together  more  than  2,000 
faith  and  community  leaders  that  partner 
with  a  myriad  of  houses  of  worship,  faith-
based  community  organizations,  and  schools, 
representing  nearly  every  religious  tradition  in 
Atlanta. Through its programs and other efforts, 
the  Coalition  will  work  to  make  connections 
across  traditions,  gain  greater  understanding 
of other communities, and advocate for a more 
tolerant and engaged civil society.

Lead Implementing Partners: 
Faith Alliance of Metro Atlanta, Interfaith 
Community Initiatives, Neshama 
Interfaith Center
Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of shared goals developed
•  # of people served
•  # of participating faith-based organizations
Funding: Partially Funded; Community 
Foundation of Greater Atlanta, Faith Alliance of 
Metro Atlanta, Interfaith Community Initiatives, 
Neshama Interfaith Center

108

109

VISION 4 TARGET 4.3

VISION 4 TARGET 4.3

Action 4.3.1: Create and implement a strategy for the City to use 100 
percent clean energy 

It was Mayor Reed’s recognition of the potential 
for energy  efficiency to help the City’s bottom  
line that led to the initial formation of what is       
now known as the Mayor’s Office of Resilience. 
Energy efficiency upgrades to municipal building 
stock have saved millions of dollars in taxpayer 
money  on  utility  expenses,  and  Mayor  Reed’s 
leadership in building energy performance has  led 
to groundbreaking policy initiatives, including the 
Atlanta Better Buildings Challenge, the largest 
program of its kind in the U.S.; the Commercial 
Buildings  Energy & Water  Efficiency  Ordinance; 
updated  sustainable  design  guidelines  for  the 
City’s  municipal  building  stock  through  the 
Sustainable  Building  Ordinance;  the  passage 
of  the  nation’s 
largest  municipal  Property 
Assessed  Clean  Energy  Financing  program; 
the  development  of  the  nation’s  largest-ever 
energy  savings  performance  contract  for  a 
municipality,  with  large-scale  efficiency  and 

capital  upgrades  in  municipal  office  buildings, 
water  and  wastewater  treatment  plants, 
and  airport  sites;  the  commitment  to  expand 
the  adoption  of  alternative  fuel  vehicles  and 
infrastructure in Atlanta through a combination 
of  leading  by  example with  our  own  fleet  and 
pursuing  policies  to  ease  the  transition  to 
alternative  fuel  vehicles  (AFV)  for  Atlantans; 
and  the  creation  of  the  first  municipal  Solar 
Energy Procurement Agreement in the State of 
Georgia,  with  the  City  putting  1.5  megawatts 
(MW)  of  rooftop  solar  panels  across  24  City-
owned facilities. It is because of these successful 
programs  and  the  transformative  impact  they 
are having on building performance in the City 
that the Atlanta City Council felt comfortable in 
adopting the ambitious target of a 100% clean 
energy  transition  for  the  City,  creating  a 2025 
target  for  municipal  operations  and  a  2035 
target for citywide energy consumption.

EXISTING ACTIONS FEEDING INTO TARGET 4.3

Clean Energy & Equity

Support a long-term stakeholder engagement 
process to develop goals and strategies 
to accelerate clean energy access and 
development in the Atlanta community with a 
foundational emphasis on racial equity. 
Lead Partner: CoA Mayor’s Office of 
Resilience

Commercial Buildings Energy & Water 

Efficiency Ordinance

Encourages improvements in energy and 
water efficiency by requiring annual energy 
and water benchmarking, as well as energy 
and water audits, in commercial buildings  
greater than 25,000 square feet.
Lead Partner: CoA Mayor’s Office of 
Resilience

Solar Atlanta

The City is leading by example by installing 
1.5 MW of solar capacity on 24 municipal 
properties.
Lead Partner: CoA Mayor’s Office of 
Resilience

Energy Savings Performance Contract

Upgrading 100 municipal properties with 
energy efficiency, water efficiency, and 
operational improvements, reducing carbon 
emissions while saving millions in taxpayer 
dollars.
Lead Partner: CoA Mayor’s Office of 
Resilience, Office of Enterprise Assets 
Management, Department of Watershed 
Management, Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta 
International Airport

Atlanta 100% Clean Energy Plan

In  May  2017,  the  City  of  Atlanta  passed 
a  resolution  to  develop  a  100%  clean 
energy  plan  by  January  2018.  The  plan 
will  be  developed  with  robust  input  by  the 
community with a pathway for continuous 
review  to  check  progress  and  adapt 
approaches. The plan will emphasize carbon 
reductions, 
improved 
public health, and economic development.

resilience,  equity, 

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  Reduction in # metric tons of cabon 

•  # of MW of solar capacity installed on 

dioxide emissions 

municipal buildings

•  # of water audits conducted in 

commercial buildings >25,000 square ft

•  $ available for energy-efficiency 

improvements 

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Funding: Partially Funded; CoA 

Primary Driver
Provides & 
Enhances Natural & 
Manmade Assets

Secondary Driver
Meets Basic Needs

Secondary Driver
Fosters Long-
Term & Integrated  
Planning

Alternative Fuel Vehicle Adoption 
Transitioning the City fleet to 20% electric 
vehicles and 12% other alternative fuel 
vehicles by 2020 while enacting policies to 
encourage public adoption of alternative fuel 
vehicles.
Lead Partner: CoA Mayor’s Office of 
Resilience, Vision Ridge, The Electrification 
Coalition

Clean Energy Atlanta – PACE Financing

A $500 million commercial Property Assessed 
Clean Energy (PACE) financing program will 
make funding available to constituents for 
energy efficiency, on-site renewable energy, 
and water efficiency improvements.
Lead Partner: Invest Atlanta, CoA Mayor’s 
Office of Resilience

Sustainable Building Ordinance

Atlanta Better Buildings Challenge

City-owned properties required to obtain LEED 
Silver certification for new construction and 
major renovation in properties greater than 
5,000 square feet; City-owned properties 
greater than 25,000 square feet required to 
obtain LEED Certification for Existing Buildings 
Lead Partner: CoA Mayor’s Office of 
Resilience

Atlanta is 1st in the nation in the Department 
of Energy’s Better Buildings Challenge 
Program, with 114+ million square feet of 
commercial building space committed to 
improving their energy and water efficiency by 
20% by 2020.
Lead Partners: CoA Mayor’s Office of 
Resilience, Central Atlanta Progress, Midtown 
Alliance, Livable Buckhead, and Southface 
Energy Institute

110

111

VISION 4 TARGET 4.4

VISION 4 TARGET 4.4

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Action 4.4.1: Increase the capacity of community police 
mentorship programs 
Support  the  expansion  of  the  Atlanta  Police  Department’s 
two  police  mentorship  programs,  the Atlanta  Police Athletic 
League (PAL) and the Atlanta Police Explorers Program, which 
seek to strengthen police-community relations. PAL is a non-
profit program that offers programs, including summer camp, 
mentoring,  homework  assistance,  and  sporting  activities, 
to  engage  with  youth  citywide.  The  Explorers  Program  is 
designed to train young adults to become future leaders in law 
enforcement by building positive relationships between police 
and  youth  through  community  service  engagement,  civic 
education, and physical fitness training. Currently, 14 officers 
from  the  Police  Department’s  Community  Service  Division 
serve  225  youth.  Increasing  funding  and  capacity  of  these 
existing programs will provide more meaningful opportunities 
for  mentorship  engagement  and  improve  community  youth 
relationships with police officers in their neighborhoods.

Primary Driver
Ensures Social Stability, 
Security, & Justice
Secondary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & 
Engaged Communities
Secondary Driver
Empowers a Broad 
Range of Stakeholders
Lead Implementing Partners: 
Atlanta Police Department, 
Atlanta Police Foundation 

Potential Metrics/Measures of 
Success:
•  $ of funding for the 

•  % change in capacity for the 

programs 

programs 

•  # of youth engaged 
•  # of police officers engaged 
•  # of police force jobs 

provided to youth 

Funding: Partially Funded; 
Atlanta Police Department 

 

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Secondary Driver
Ensures Public Health Services

Primary Driver
Promotes Cohesive and Engaged 
Communities
Secondary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders

Action 4.4.2: Establish community centers to support LGBTQ+ 
youth in underserved neighborhoods by 2022
Establish two to four community centers in 
underserved communities within the City of 
Atlanta that provide a safe space for LQBTQ+ 
youth and young adults. The centers will offer 
access to mental health programs, HIV testing 
and counseling, and homelessness prevention 
wraparound services. In 2015, students from 
Georgia State and Emory Universities counted 
homeless youth ages 14 to 25 living within the 
city limits, and found that a vast majority of 
youth are African-American (71 percent) and 
male (60.5 percent), and over a quarter of 
the group identified as LGBTQ+. Additionally, 
approximately 25,000 youth exit the foster 
care system annually before being reunited 
with their family of origin, being adopted, 
or achieving another permanent living 
arrangement. These youth often have limited 
resources with which to secure safe and stable 
housing, which leaves them at heightened risk 
of experiencing homelessness 42. In October 
of 2017, the Atlanta City Council approved 
a resolution requesting that Invest Atlanta 
appropriate a percentage of funding from the 
Homeless Opportunity Project (including $26 
million from the City of Atlanta and $25 million 
in matching funds from the United Way) to 
be used for housing interventions for homeless 
LGBTQ+ teens and young adults exiting 
foster care. The investment will create 254 
housing interventions for homeless youth. The 
community centers will offer complimentary 
services to the homeless youth housing 
investment.

Lead Implementing Partners: 
Georgia Equality, Atlanta Coalition for LGBTQ+ 
Youth

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of community centers created
•  # of LGBTQ+ youth and young adults 

•  % decrease in homeless youth population
•  % decrease in new HIV cases, especially 

among young black males 15-24

served at community centers

Atlanta Chief of Police Erika Shields. Photo Credit: Central 
Atlanta Progress 

112

Photo Credit: Pride School

113

VISION 4 TARGET 4.4

VISION 4 TARGET 4.4

Resilience Value to Atlantans: 

Action 4.4.3: Track and evaluate @Promise Youth Center 
programming
Develop  an  evaluation  tool  and  dashboard 
to  assess  the  effectiveness  of  the  Atlanta 
Police  Foundation’s  @Promise  Youth  Center 
programming in providing pathways to success 
for  at-risk  youth  in  2018.  In  partnership  with 
the  Atlanta  Police  Department,  the  Atlanta 
Hawks  Foundation,  the  Boys  &  Girls  Club  of 
Metro Atlanta, and others, the @Promise Youth 
Center provides after school activities, workforce 
training, police mentorship programs, counseling 
services,  and  outdoor  exercise  opportunities  to 
children  and young  adults  in Westside Atlanta. 
The evaluation tool and public online dashboard 
will help the @Promise Youth Center determine 
whether  it  is  successfully  fulfilling  its  goal  of 
tackling  the  root  causes  of  juvenile  behavioral 
issues  and  diverting  youth  from  the  juvenile 
justice  system.  Furthermore,  the  evaluation 
could  help  determine  whether  the  project  is 
replicable in other areas of the city.

Primary Driver
Ensures Social Stability, Security, & 
Justice
Secondary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders
Secondary Driver
Fosters Long-Term & Integrated  
Planning

Lead Implementing Partners: 
Atlanta Police Foundation

system through @Promise Youth Center 
programing

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of unique users of online dashboard
•  # of youth diverted from the juvenile justice 

•  # of other neighborhoods that replicate the 

program

Partner Spotlight

@Promise Youth Center

Opened 
in  August  2017,  the  @Promise 
Youth  Center  provides  children  and  young 
adults 
in  Westside  Atlanta  with  after-
school  programming,  workforce  training, 
police  mentorship  programs,  counseling 
services, and outdoor exercise opportunities. 
The  Center    addresses    juvenile  crime  in 
Atlanta  by 
intervention 
strategies to address problematic behaviors, 

incorporating 

offering  alternatives  to 
illegal  activities, 
and  encouraging crime prevention through 
fostering personal growth and development. 
Attendees may be referred to the Center by 
the Atlanta Police Department, the Atlanta 
Public  Schools  System,  the  Fulton  County 
Juvenile Court and Probation systems, or by 
members of the community.

114

 

to 

(CERT)  program 

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Secondary Driver
Promotes Cohesive & 
Engaged Communities
Secondary Driver
Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders

Action 4.4.4: Strengthen community disaster preparedness 
and response by 2021 
Expand  the  Citizens  Emergency  Response 
Training 
strengthen 
neighborhood-level  disaster  preparedness  and 
response. Educating and training residents and 
business owners to respond safely, responsibly, 
and  effectively  to  emergency  situations  and 
to  support  their  communities  during  non-
emergency  events  is  key  to  neighborhood-
level  preparedness  and  resilience.  Community 
preparedness also develops a strong foundation 
for  a  more  resilient  city  overall.  The  City’s  25 
robust  Neighborhood  Planning  Unit  system 
provides  an  opportunity 
implement 
targeted CERT training and neighborhood-level 
emergency  response  planning  and  registries, 
tailored to each neighborhood’s demographics 
and overall needs, in order to create a local level 
volunteer  corps.  Integration  and  coordination 
with 
networks, 
nongovernmental  organizations,  urgent  care 
centers,  clinics,  and  community  medical 
centers will be key to this training and planning 
effort. With the City’s foreign-born population 
growing  by  nearly  22  percent  from  2010-2012 
and equity being identified as one of the City’s 
greatest challenges, training and education will 
be  designed  and  implemented  to  ensure  that 
residents  are  able  to  support  themselves  and 
their neighbors in the face of disaster.43

Lead Implementing Partners: 
CoA Mayor’s Office of Constituent Services, CoA 
Department of City Planning , Atlanta-Fulton 
County Emergency Management Agency, CoA 
Mayor’s Office of Emergency Preparedness, 
Georgia voluntary organizations active in 
disaster

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of CERT trained residents
•  # of immigrant communities represented
•  # of businesses participating in emergency 

Funding: Partially Funded; Urban Area Security 
Initiative 

preparedness and business continuity 
planning

•  # of trained personnel registered for VOAD

telemedicine 

existing 

to 

Atlanta Fire firefighters. Photo Credit: City of Atlanta

115
115

VISION 4 TARGET 4.5

VISION 4 TARGET 4.5

leader 

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Secondary Driver
Fosters Economic Prosperity

Primary Driver
Supports Livelihoods & Employment

Action 4.5.1: Launch an Airport Resilience and Sustainability 
Innovation Center by 2023 
Create  an  innovation  hub  at  Hartsfield-
International  Airport  to 
Jackson  Atlanta 
develop  new  technologies  that 
increase 
the  resilience  and  sustainability  of  airports 
around  the  world.  This 
initiative  would 
position  Atlanta  as  a  global 
in 
resilience  by  piloting  and  commercializing 
cutting-edge  technologies  in  avionics  and 
clean  energy,  as  well  as  provide  space  to 
support  innovation.  The  Center  would  offer 
a maker lab where entrepreneurs could build 
products,  technologies,  and  prototypes  and 
pilot  their  ideas  at  the  Airport.  It  will  also 
expand existing partnerships with companies 
such as Porsche and Delta and develop new 
partnerships with venture capital firms to fund 
the Center and new technologies. Initiatives 
that could be incubated at the Center  include 
autonomous  vehicles,  alternative  revenue 
sources  for  parking  facilities,  expansion  of 
data  centers,  water  conservation,  updating 
air traffic control systems, and clean energy 
technologies to help the City of Atlanta meet 
its 100 percent clean energy goal.

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of resilience goals developed across multiple 
sectors, including energy, water management, 
refrigerant/cooling technologies, and 
hospitality using established standards and 
rankings, such as ISO 5001 Certification and 
Global Reporting Initiative ratings
•  # of innovative technologies tested
•  # of technologies developed from the 

Lead Implementing Partners: 
Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, 
CoA Mayor’s Office of Resilience, Local post-
secondary academic institutions  

resilience hub that are implemented at 
airports or other facilities

•  # of companies using the maker lab
•  # of patents granted to innovators using the 

resilience space 

Photo Credit:  Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International 
Airport. 

116
116

Resilience Value to Atlantans:

Primary Driver
Supports Livelihoods & Employment

Action 4.5.2: Make the world’s most traveled airport a world-
class leader in providing livable wage, publictransportation 
accessible jobs
Implement  workforce  development  training 
and  transportation  policies  for  Hartsfield-
Jackson Atlanta  International Airport  by 2022 
specifically  targeted  at  attracting  candidates 
from low-income and minority communities on 
Atlanta’s  south  side.  In  2016,  the  Aerotropolis 
Atlanta  Community 
Improvement  District 
released  a  master  plan  calling  for  catalytic 
development  projects  including  a  cargo  hub, 
biologistics  center,  parts  distribution  center, 
data  center,  restaurant  hub,  and  an  energy 
city  focused  on  solar  projects.  This  initiative 
will support workforce development programs 
already  underway  as  part  of  the  Aerotropolis 
master  plan  and  capitalize  on  the  Airport’s 
MARTA transit station to ensure transportation 
accessibility.  The  Aerotropolis  initiative  would 
involve identifying and acquiring a site, either 
city-owned  or  purchased  with  public-private 
dollars,  to  renovate  and  develop  a  workforce 
training center.

•  # of new jobs created
•  Wages of new jobs created
•  # of trainees and employees commuting to 

Potential Metrics/Measures of Success:
•  # of people trained
•  % of different demographics of trainees and 

Secondary Driver
Provides Reliable Communication 
& Mobility 

Lead Implementing Partners: 
Aerotropolis, Invest Atlanta

work using MARTA 

employees

Partner Spotlight

CityXChange

100 

inaugural 

The 
Resilient  Cities 
CityXChange  Summit  was  held  at  The 
Rockefeller  Foundation’s  Bellagio  Center  in 
Italy  from  May  14-17,  2017.  The  aim  of  the 
Summit was to provide a framework through 
which cities, startups, and venture capitalists 
could  challenge  each  other  to  develop  new 
models to work together and solve problems 
that will enhance public services and quality 
of life in urban centers. The Summit focused 
on  a  variety  of  issues  that  participating 
cities  face,  including  transportation,  civic 
engagement,  infrastructure,  public  safety, 
health  and  well-being,  and 
resource 
management.
Mayor  Kasim  Reed  discussed  the  City  of 

Atlanta’s commitment to achieve 100 percent 
renewable  energy  for  municipal  operations 
by 2025. As  a  result  of  these  discussions  at 
CityXChange,  Atlanta  will  focus  on  making 
Hartsfield-Jackson  Atlanta 
International 
Airport  a  model  of  resilience  and  clean 
energy  initiatives  with  a  best-in-class  tech 
innovation  center.  Hartsfield-Jackson  is  the 
world’s  busiest  and  most  efficient  airport. 
Additionally,  the  City  of  Atlanta  will  seek 
opportunities to partner with venture capital 
firms  as  well  as  other  critical  partners  to 
create  public-private  partnerships 
that 
foster  innovative  solutions  to  challenges  in 
deploying clean energy, starting with a clean 
energy project at the airport.

117
117

PARTNER FEATURE HARTSFIELD-JACKSON INITIATIVES

PARTNER FEATURE: 
HARTSFIELD-JACKSON 
ATLANTA INTERNATIONAL 
AIRPORT INITIATIVES

Originally called Candler Field when opened in 1925 by Mayor Walter Sims, 
Hartsfield-Jackson  Atlanta  International  Airport  became  and  remains  the 
hub  for  Delta  Air  Lines.  However,  the  Airport  underwent  its  most  notable 
transformation under the leadership of Mayor Maynard Jackson. Known for 
his large-scale public works projects, in 1977, Mayor Jackson invested  $500 
million  in  the  construction  of  a  new  terminal  --  which  completed  what  is 
now known as Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. He was also 
integral in incorporating minority business participation at the Airport.

Often described as a global gateway, Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International 
Airport offers nonstop service to more than 150 domestic and more than 70 
international  destinations  in  over  50  countries.  It  is  the  busiest  and  most 
efficient airport in the world in daily passenger flights, serving more than 104 
million passengers each year. Additionally, the Airport is a major economic and 
employment hub for the Metro region, generating $34.8 billion of economic 
impact  in  Metro Atlanta  and  $70.9  billion  in  Georgia  while  providing  more 
than 63,000 jobs on-site as the State’s largest employer.

The Airport is in the process of executing ATLNext, a multi-billion -dollar capital 
improvement program with a 20-year blueprint for growth. It is also a model of 
sustainability. With the Asset Management and Sustainability (AMS) division 
driving the Airport’s commitment to achieve the triple bottom line through 
its  GreeningATL program, Hartsfield-Jackson is working to become one of the 
world’s greenest airports.

The Airport’s AMS team works closely with CoA Mayor’s Office of Resilience to 
coordinate resilience efforts.

118

PARTNER FEATURE HARTSFIELD-JACKSON INITIATIVES

Highlights: 

Airport Employee Ride Options 
(AERO)
AERO helps Airport employees save money, get 
to  and  from  work  stress-free,  and  improve  air 
quality by promoting and incentivizing commute 
alternatives,  such  as  carpooling,  vanpooling, 
public transit, and biking. Partially funded by a 
grant  from  the  Atlanta  Regional  Commission, 
AERO is in its second full year of activation and 
the  momentum  is  building.  Partnerships  have 
been established with Delta Air Lines, Southwest 
Airlines, City of Atlanta Department of Aviation, 
and Concessions International.    

Apiary
The Airport’s AMS  division  is working  to  create 
an apiary for the use of biomonitoring Atlanta’s 
emissions  and  air  quality  while  establishing  a 
means  of  non  traditional  revenue. Apiaries  are 
relatively  inexpensive  investments  with  many 
beneficial aspects and cost recovery capabilities. 
Apiary  placement  supports 
local  pollinator 
efforts and health, puts land to use that might 
otherwise  not  be  activated,  produces  hive 
products  (such  as  honey)  that  can  be  sold  or 
donated, and offers employees opportunities for 
engagement  and  satisfaction.  Bees  also  serve 
as  biomarkers  of  environmental  change  and 
create  opportunities  for  community  outreach 
and involvement.

Green Infrastructure 
The  Airport’s  Green  Infrastructure  Master  Plan 
identified  a  potential  increase  of  7.8  million 
gallons  of  stormwater  runoff  per  each  one-
inch  rain  event  based  on  areas  proposed  for 
development  in  the  Airport  2015  Master  Plan 
(not including the runway or Concourse G). AMS 
has  identified  a  number  of  projects  to  reduce 
stormwater runoff by 1.4 million gallons per each 
one-inch rain event.

Raising Awareness
Change  the  Course,  a  partnership  with  the 
Bonneville  Environmental  Foundation  and 
Delta  Air  Lines  raises  awareness  about  water 
conservation  and  the  Flint  River. The Airport  is 

situated  on  the  headwaters  of  the  Flint  River 
which,  as  a  result  of  a  25-year  tri-state  water 
dispute, runs dry in mild drought. The Airport has 
become a steward of the river. Signage has been 
placed  over  36  water  bottle  refilling  stations 
throughout  the  terminals  and  concourses, 
prompting  individuals  to  text  to  a  repository 
monitored  by  the  AMS  Division.  For  each  text, 
1,000  gallons  of  water  will  be  restored  to  the 
Flint River and adjoining watersheds. So far, the 
Airport and Delta have restored more than two 
million gallons of water.

Solar Solutions
The  Airport  began  implementing  solar  power 
to  support  security  camera  operations  and  to 
provide  energy  at  the  domestic  taxi  assembly 
lot. Several other facilities have been identified 
as potential sites to implement solar power and 
additional assessments will be conducted in the 
future.
  
Waste Diversion 
The  Airport  deploys  several  waste  diversion 
strategies to manage food court, cargo waste, 
and aircraft recycling. In December 2017, waste 
receptacle kiosks that include education elements   
will be installed throughout food court areas so 
that  passengers  are  able  to  further  separate 
recyclables, organics, and waste. In the future, 
the Airport plans to complete a comprehensive 
waste  characterization  audit  for  all  materials 
generated  by  the  cargo  facilities  in  order  to 
better  understand  diversion  opportunities  and 
values of the commodities. Additionally, it plans 
to  reduce  and  recycle  airfield  foreign  object 
debris generated by the airlines and vendors alike. 
Green Acres ATL’s Energy Park will be responsible 
for  diverting  90  percent  of  the Airport’s waste 
stream from landfills by 2020.

For more information, please visit 
www.atl.com/community/sustainability 

Photo Credit: Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International 
Airport.

119
119

VISION 4 SHARED INSPIRATION

VISION 4: 
SHARED INSPIRATION 
FROM THE 100RC 
GLOBAL NETWORK

ACTION 4.2.1: 
Boulder is developing a community- 
driven, interactive “Mobile Resilience 
Lab” to bring resilience and 
preparedness activities directly into 
neighborhoods.

ACTION 4.2.2: 
San Francisco iSan Francisco is reimagining the City’s 29 
public libraries as community spaces to conduct community 
outreach meetings.
ACTION 4.4.4: 
San Francisco is increasing training for neighborhood 
emergency response teams.
ACTION 4.2.1: 
Oakland is opening a civic design lab for problem solving 
across city departments and in collaboration with partners 
based on human-centered design. 
TARGET 4.3: 
Oakland is assessing equity impacts and feasibility of 100 
percent clean and renewable energy.

ACTION 4.1.6: 
Bristol’s Black and Green Initiative 
is addressing inclusiveness and 
environmental awareness by kick-
starting a long term series of activities 
and relationships with Black and Minority 
Ethnic communities around the legacy of 
the European Green Capital year. 

VISION 4 SHARED INSPIRATION

ACTION 4.2.4: 
Byblos is using participatory budget 
planning; allocating budgets to each 
neighborhood committees to decide on 
how and where the money shall be spent.  

ACTION 4.2.2: 
Semarang is promoting 
continuous education 
service for people of all 
ages with neighborhood 
“smart houses” and 
libraries. 

ACTION 4.1.3: 
Surat is promoting civic 
engagement initiated 
during the Smart City 
program to engage and 
influence development 
processes.

ACTION 4.1.1: 
Mexico City is developing methodologies for 
the inclusion of the concept of resilience in large 
infrastructure projects such as allocating 10 
percent of the expenditures budget to building 
resilience.

120

ACTION 4.4.2: 
Boston is advancing the ongoing 
development of community training for 
healing, well-being, and preparedness 
in the face of chronic stresses and 
traumatic events.

ACTION 4.2.5: 
Thessaloniki  is establishing a 
safe routes to school scheme using 
e-participation tools to crowdsource 
data, a set of physical measures, 
and policies to improve urban 
conditions along school routes.

ACTION 4.1.3: 
Christchurch is experimenting with alternative forms 
of public participation to promote awareness of 
issues and engage people in decision-making.
Action 4.2.5: 
Christchurch is using tools like the Snap Send Solve 
Develop app to make reporting issues easier.

121

PLATFORM PARTNER SPOTLIGHT

PLATFORM PARTNER 
SPOTLIGHT

PLATFORM PARTNER SPOTLIGHT

Esri

Rebuild by Design

Within a few days of Atlanta’s Interstate 85 bridge collapse in March 2017, Esri 
created CommuteATL, a web-based one-stop resource for Atlanta residents 
to obtain up-to-date, interactive information on commuting options, including 
MARTA schedules, parking availability around MARTA stations, bike share 
locations, and traffic data. Post-bridge repair, the City is coordinating with 
the Atlanta Regional Commission to keep the CommuteATL website active 
and continue to add functionality so that the data will remain relevant and aid 
commuters in seeking more transportation alternatives.

The  City  of  Atlanta  is  partnering  with  Rebuild  by  Design  to  develop  a 
competition  among  local  Atlanta  colleges  and  universities  to  provide 
innovative design ideas for the City’s infrastructure upgrades to Ted Turner 
Drive.  This  public-private  partnership  between  the  City’s  ReNew  Atlanta 
team and Turner Enterprises will result in upgrades to enhance the roadway, 
which, depending on the winning design, may include  green infrastructure, 
solar installations, bicycle lanes, and/or smart technology.

ioby

Wood. 

Resilient Atlanta’s Urban Agriculture Program is making City-owned parcels 
available to residents to farm as neighborhood gardens. To ensure that this 
initiative  is  grassroots-driven  and  diverse,  Resilient  Atlanta  will  fundraise 
using ioby’s nonprofit crowdfunding platform to hire local residents to serve 
as community ambassadors for each garden. These ambassadors will help 
publicize the program, seek qualified community members to farm the sites, 
and support design and construction of the gardens.

Wood.  is providing technical support for the Proctor Creek Greenway, a seven-
mile trail from the Westside Atlanta BeltLine to the Chattahoochee River. The 
Wood. team will be conducting workshops to get community feedback on 
how to enhance the project’s resilience, as well as to raise awareness about 
ways in which resilience can enhance the quality of life of Atlanta residents.

122

The Proctor Creek Greenway. Photo Credit: City of Atlanta

123

A CALL TO 
ACTION

CALL TO ACTION

Metro Atlanta’s most valuable asset is our people. The ideas 
in Resilient Atlanta all originated from within Metro Atlanta 
communities. We need your continued partnership to help 
make  these  ideas  a  reality. While  all  of  the  Actions  listed 
Lead  Implementing  Partners,  the  lists  are  not  exhaustive 
or  limited  to  those  listed.  Please  join  us  in  strengthening 
Atlanta’s  resilience  by  participating  in  these  efforts. Your 
continued collaboration will help us create a more equitable 
and resilient Metro Atlanta. 

Here are some ways to get involved:

1.  VISIT OUR WEBSITE, www.resilientatlanta.com, to follow the ongoing progress of the Strategy. 
The interactive website is the primary source for updates, events, and opportunities related to 
Resilient Atlanta. Community members will also be able to submit requests to include new or 
ongoing initiatives that support the Strategy. 

2.  SHARE YOUR COMMENTS and thoughts with us via social media. This Strategy was rooted 
in  community  input,  and we  appreciate your  continued  feedback. You  can  connect with  us 
on Twitter and Instagram @ATLResilience, or with the hashtag #ResilientAtlanta. You can also 
contact our office at resilient@atlantaga.gov or call 404-865-8715. 

3.  STAY INFORMED about more opportunities to get involved with the work of the Mayor’s Office 

of Resilience. You can sign up for our mailing list on our website or follow us on Twitter. 

4.  LEARN MORE ABOUT ATLANTA’S PARTNERSHIP WITH 100 RESILIENT CITIES by visiting 
www.100resilientcities.org. Explore the steps that other cities are taking to tackle their own 
resilience challenges.

5.  START A CONVERSATION about Resilient Atlanta with your family, friends, and colleagues. This 
Strategy will have the greatest impact by reaching as many Metro Atlantans as possible.  Thank 
you for making Resilient Atlanta.

Young women marching at the March for Science Atlanta in 
2017. Photo Credit: Erik Voss

124

125

SUMARY OF ACTIONS 

SUMMARY OF 
ACTIONS

VISION 1: PRESERVE AND CELEBRATE WHO WE ARE
Target 1.1: Become a national leader by 2022 in addressing structural 
racism, reconciling historic racism, and promoting racial equity

SUMMARY OF ACTIONS 

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Lead Implementing Partners

Metrics

Timeframe

Funding

Create a formal 
City document and 
Corresponding policies 
by 2020 to recognize and 
reconcile past systemic 
wrongdoings 

Primary: Promotes Cohesive and Engaged 
Communities; Secondary: Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders

CoA Mayor’s Office, CoA Chief 
Equity Officer, Local race-
focused organizations and 
experts

# of unique neighborhood forums held, # of attendees at forums, % of different 
demographics of attendees, Improved racial equity noted through qualitative public surveys, 
# of policy changes implemented that support racial equity 

Long-term; 2018 
Q3 launch

Unfunded

Launch IMAGINE 50/50 series 
to vision a racially equitable 
Metro Atlanta

Primary: Promotes Cohesive and Engaged 
Communities; Secondary: Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders

Both And Partners Inc., One 
Small Change Inc., Civic 
Dinners

# of attendees at events, % of different demographics of attendees, # of visions/initiatives 
implemented as result of events, # of unique neighborhoods in which forums are held, # of 
policy changes implemented that support racial equity

Long-term; 2018 
Q2 Launch

Unfunded

1.1.1

1.1.2

Target 1.2: Document and share the stories of Atlanta’s 242 
neighborhoods and Metro Atlanta’s 29 counties

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Lead Implementing Partners

Metrics

Timeframe

Funding

1.2.1

Elevate conversations about 
Metro Atlanta’s resilience by 
hosting 500 Civic Dinners by 
2025

Primary: Promotes Cohesive and Engaged 
Communities; Secondary: Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders

Civic Dinners, Atlanta Regional 
Commission

1.2.2

Create a “People of Atlanta” 
Platform by 2020

Primary: Promotes Cohesive and Engaged 
Communities; Secondary: Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders

WonderRoot, Atlanta History 
Center

Target 1.3: Build Atlanta’s arts and culture sector to become one of the 
city’s fastest growing industries by 2025

# of Civic Dinners, # of topics addressed at dinners, # of attendees who turn into volunteers, 
% of different demographics of attendees, # of relationships formed, as measured by Civic 
Dinners platform, Facebook or other social platform connections

Long-term; 2018 
Q1 Launch

Unfunded

# of unique pageviews on website portal, # of likes and comments on social media sources, # 
of story requests received, % of different demographics of storytellers, # of youth trained and 
hired

Long-term; 2018 
Q4 launch

Unfunded

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Lead Implementing Partners

Metrics

Timeframe

Funding

Create a comprehensive 
cultural plan for the City of 
Atlanta

Primary: Promotes Cohesive and Engaged 
Communities; Secondary: Fosters Economic Prosperity, 
Fosters Long-Term and Integrated Planning 

CoA Mayor’s Manager of Public 
Art

# of outreach events conducted while creating the plan, # of attendees at outreach events , 
% of different demographics of attendees , # of dedicated funding streams won due to the 
cultural plan, # of initiatives implemented as a result of the plan, # of growing, healthy small- 
and mid-sized arts organizations in the city  

Medium-term; 
2017 Q4 Launch

Unfunded

Promote workforce 
development in the arts and 
humanities sectors

Primary: Fosters Economic Prosperity; Secondary: 
Promoted Cohesive and Engaged Communities, 
Supports Livelihoods and Employment

CoA Mayor’s Manager of Public 
Art, CoA Office of Film and 
Entertainment 

# of creative economy workforce roundtables, $ of fundraising received due to roundtables, 
% different demographics of attendees, # of jobs created due to roundtables, # of board 
members gained due to roundtables

Long-term; 2018 
Q3 launch 

Unfunded

Promote economic 
development in the arts and 
humanities sectors through 
a creative rescue and reuse 
program

Primary: Promotes Cohesive and Engaged 
Communities; Secondary: Fosters Economic Prosperity, 
Supports Livelihoods and Employment

CoA Mayor’s Manager of Public 
Art, CoA Office of Film and 
Entertainment 

# of items donated per month, # and types of donors , # and types of recipients  , # of 
pounds of waste diverted through the program

Long-term; 2018 
Q2 launch 

Unfunded

1.3.1

1.3.2

1.3.3

126

127

SUMMARY OF ACTIONS 

VISION 2: ENABLE ALL METRO ATLANTANS TO PROSPER
Target 2.1: Prepare 100 percent of Metro Atlanta’s children for 
Kindergarten

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

2.1.1

Support Georgia’s Universal 
Pre-K Program for all 4-year-
olds by reducing the number 
of children on Pre-K waiting 
lists in high-need areas 

Primary: Empowers a Broad Range of Stakeholders; 
Secondary: Supports Livelihoods and Employment, 
Fosters Long-term and Integrated Planning

Lead Implementing Partners

Georgia Early Education 
Alliance for Ready Students 
(GEEARS), Bright from 
the Start, Quality Care for 
Children, Regional public 
school systems

2.1.2

Expand the capacity of 
Learn4Life early childhood 
initiatives

Primary: Empowers a Broad Range of Stakeholders; 
Secondary: Supports Livelihoods and Employment, 
Fosters Economic Prosperity

Learn4Life

Target 2.2: Connect 10,000 Metro Atlantans to at least 10,000 new 
livable wage jobs by 2020

SUMMARY OF ACTIONS 

Metrics

Timeframe

Funding

% increase in enrollment of low income students in Metro Atlanta pre-K programs, % 
increase in number of slots available to Metro Atlanta pre-K students

Mid-term; 2018 
Q4 launch

Unfunded

% of 3rd granders reading proficiently on grade level, # of families served, # of books 
distributed, # of teachers trained, # of unique hits on online tools, # of eye exams provided

Short-term; 2018 
Q2 launch

Unfunded

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Lead Implementing Partners

Metrics

Timeframe

Funding

2.2.1

2.2.2

2.2.3

Establish a $5 million dollar 
Creative Industries Revolving 
Loan Fund to support and 
retain local film and music 
talent

Revitalize the Mayor’s Youth 
Scholarship Program summer 
employment component 
and provide employment 
opportunities to at least 
5,000 high school students 
by 2020

Expand the capacity of 
workforce re-entry programs 
for previously incarcerated 
young adults by at least 25 
percent

Primary: Supports Livelihoods and Employment; 
Secondary: Fosters Economic Prosperity

CoA Mayor’s Office of Film and 
Entertainment, CoA Mayor’s 
Office of International Affairs, 
Invest Atlanta, Metro Atlanta 
Chanber, ChooseATL

Primary: Supports Livelihoods and Employment; 
Secondary: Empowers a Broad Range of Stakeholders

WorkSource Atlanta, CoA 
Office of Constituent Services, 
CoA Mayor’s Office

# of metro Atlanta-based productions, # of and $ amount of loans provided to creative 
talent in Atlanta, # of local production and post-production firms, # of local production and 
post-production full time equivalent (FTE) jobs

Short-term; 2017 
Q4 launch

Unfunded

# of new summer jobs available, # of APS high school students hired for a summer job, # and 
types of organizations providing summer employment opportunities

Long-term; 2018 
Q3 launch

Unfunded

Primary: Supports Livelihoods and Employment; 
Secondary:Ensures Social Stability, Security and Justice

Urban League of Greater 
Atlanta, The Come Up Project

# of participants trained, # of participants that receive internships and permanent 
employment, Recidivism rate for participants, crime rates, % of prisoners in counties served 
that are Black , $ increase in funding for Training to Work 2 initiatives

Long-term; 2018 
Q1 Launch

Partially 
Funded; US 
Department 
of Labor, Food 
Well Alliance

2.2.4

Fund a permanent, full-time 
First Source outreach liaison 
at WorkSource Atlanta

Primary: Supports Livelihoods and Employment; 
Secondary: Fosters Economic Prosperity

WorkSource Atlanta, CoA 
Mayor’s Office

# of First Source program participants, both in terms of businesses and jobseekers, # of First 
Source job seekers placed in jobs, # of successfully placed participants still on the job after six 
months, one year, and two years

Long-term; 2018 
Q2 launch

Unfunded

Target 2.3: Ensure career choice in Metro Atlanta

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Lead Implementing Partners

Metrics

Timeframe

Funding

2.3.1

Establish the Advancing 
Collective Prosperity Through 
Entrepreneurship Initiative

Primary: Supports Livelihoods and Employment; 
Secondary: Fosters Economic Prosperity

Community of Practice

# of jobs created, Increase in Black employment, # of businesses participating, Increased 
financial capability for participating entrepreneurs, Job retention rate, Increase in hourly 
wages for employees and yearly salary for employers

Long-term; 2017 
Q3 launch

128

Partilially 
Funded; Annie 
E. Casey 
Foundation 
and The 
Kendada Fund

129

SUMMARY OF ACTIONS 

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Lead Implementing Partners

Metrics

SUMMARY OF ACTIONS 

Timeframe

Funding

Primary: Supports Livelihoods and Employment; 
Secondary: Ensures Social Stability, Security and Justice

Atlanta BeltLine, Inc., CoA 
Mayor’s Office of Resilience

$ of funds invested in community, # of businesses supported or retained, # of new business 
attracted,, $ of new private investment within a defined geography as the result of this 
program

Medium-term; Q1 
2018 launch

Partially 
Funded; 
Atlanta 
BeltLine, Inc.

2.3.2

2.3.3

Establish a $1 million fund 
and implement a program 
to maintain affordability of 
small business and maker 
rental space along newly 
developing BeltLine corridors

Increase access to 
affordable, high-quality child 
care programs for infants 
and toddlers in Metro Atlanta 
through policy, regulation, 
and new funding options for 
subsidies and scholarships

Primary: Empowers a Broad Range of Stakeholders; 
Secondary: Supports Livelihoods and Employment, 
Fosters Long-Term and Integrated Planning

2.3.4

Establish a child and 
dependent care program for 
the City’s safety personnel

Primary: Supports Livelihoods and Employment; 
Secondary: Ensures Social Stability, Security and Justice

VISION 3: BUILD OUR FUTURE CITY TODAY
Target 3.1: Improve quality, access, and distribution of affordable 
housing in Metro Atlanta

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Improve quality of affordable 
housing and strengthen 
resident resilience 

Primary: Meets Basic Needs; Secondary: Fosters Long-
Term and Integrated Planning, Empowers a Broad 
Range of Stakeholders 

Decrease the number of 
cost-burdened residents and 
increase the production and 
preservation of affordable 
housing
Create citywide housing 
resilience standards and a 
toolkit of initiatives to make 
housing developments more 
affordable and resilient
Increase access to 
permanent housing for 
homeless and aid in ending 
chronic homelessness in the 
city by 2020

Primary: Meets Basic Needs; Secondary: Fosters Long-
Term and Integrated Planning, Promotes Leadership 
and Effective Management

Primary: Meets Basic Needs; Secondary: Promotes 
Cohesive and Engaged Communities, Fosters Economic 
Prosperity

Primary: Meets Basic Needs; Secondary: Empowers a 
Broad Range of Stakeholders

Georgia Early Education 
Alliance for Ready Students 
(GEEARS), Bright from the 
Start, United Way of Greater 
Atlanta, Quality Care for 
Children

Atlanta Fire and Rescue 
Department, Atlanta Police 
Department, Atlanta Police 
Foundation, Quality of Care for 
Children

Lead Implementing Partners

Atlanta Police Department, 
CoA Department of City 
Planning, Atlanta Volunteer 
Lawyers Foundation, Housing 
Justice League

CoA Department of City 
Planning, CoA Mayor’s Office 
of Resilience, HR&A Advisors, 
Inc.

Atlanta BeltLine, Inc., Invest 
Atlanta, CoA Department of 
Planning, Atlanta Housing 
Authority, CoA Mayor’s Office 
of Resilience

Atlanta Partners for HOME, 
Atlanta Housing Authority, 
CoA Department of City 
Planning   

Launch a community assets 
mapping platform and data 
literacy education program

Primary: Promotes Cohesive and Engaged 
Communities; Secondary: Empowers a Broad Range 
of Stakeholders, Fosters Long-Term and Integrated 
Planning

CoA Department of City 
Planning, Neighborhood 
Nexus, Georgia Institute of 
Technology 

3.1.1

3.1.2

3.1.3

3.1.4

3.1.5

130

% increase in Quality Rated child care programs in Metro Atlanta, % increase in low income 
families in Metro Atlanta receiving a public or privately funded subsidy or scholarship for child 
care, # of children enrolled in high quality learning environments

Mid-term; 2019 
Q1 launch

Unfunded

% change in employee retention rates, % change in number of female personnel after 
pilot program, % change in demographics of new safety personnel, % increase in overall 
applicants for employment, # of children enrolled in program, # of child and dependent care 
centers servicing alternative work schedules

Long-term; 2019 
Q1 launch

Unfunded

Metrics

Timeframe

Funding

# of reformed building codes, tax codes, foreclosure policies, # of foreclosures, # of 
homeowner assistance education events, # of renters’ rights education events, # of renters 
utilizing eviction counseling services , # of eviction notices served 

Long-Term; 2018 
Q2 launch

Unfunded

# of initiatives implemented out of Housing Resilience strategy, # of stakeholders included 
in the production of the Housing Needs Assessment and plan, # of community engagement 
and outreach events  

Short-Term; 2017 
Q4 launch

Fully 
Funded; CoA 
Department of 
City Planning 

# of affordable units built, # of affordable housing initiatives with resilience components, $ of 
new funding allocated to support affordable housing

Short-Term; 
Develop resilience 
toolkit by Q3 2018

Unfunded

# of landlord education and outreach events, # of new landlords enrolling in the program, 
# of new units that accept housing subsidies within 24 months, # of families and individuals 
living in permanent housing using subsidies, # of turnovers in permanent supportive housing 
units

Medium-term; 
2018 Q2 launch  

# of unique hits on the platform, # of comments and new posts on the platform, # of 
community-driven initiatives created by platform use, # of grants or other resources secured 
for app-sourced ideas, # of data literacy training courses, % improvement in community 
member’s data literacy before and after courses measured through assessments

Long-Term; 2018 
Q1 launch 

Partially 
Funded; 
Atlanta 
Partners for 
HOME

Partially 
Funded; 
Atlanta 
Regional 
Commission

131

SUMMARY OF ACTIONS 

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Lead Implementing Partners

Metrics

SUMMARY OF ACTIONS 

Timeframe

Funding

3.1.6

Expand the Anti-
Displacement Tax Fund 
to mitigate gentrification 
market forces

Primary: Fosters Economic Prosperity; Secondary: 
Promotes Cohesive and Engaged Communities

Westside Community 
Retention Collaboration

# of homeowners issued grants, % decrease in displacement of hownowners in target 
neighborhoods, # of additional qualifying neighborhoods added to fund coverage

Short-term;          
2018 Q3 launch 

Partially Funded: 
Arthur M. Blank 
Family Foundation, 
Chick-fil-A 
Foundation, 
Georgia Power 
Foundation, 
Cox Enterprises, 
Pulte Group, 
Delta Air Lines, 
Georgia-Pacific 
and individual 
contributor Tommy 
Holder, chairman 
and CEO of Holder 
Construction 
Company

Target 3.2: Improve access to transportation across Metro Atlanta

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Lead Implementing Partners

Metrics

Timeframe

Funding

3.2.1

Expand transit service routes 
throughout Metro Atlanta, 
especially in low-income, 
low-access communities

Primary: Provides Reliable Communication and Mobility; 
Secondary: Fosters Long-Term and Integrated Planning

3.2.2

Create an integrated fare 
structure across Atlanta’s 
transit providers

Primary: Provides Reliable Communication and 
Mobility; Secondary: Promotes Leadership and Effective 
Management, Fosters Economic Prosperity

Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid 
Transit Authority, Atlanta 
Regional Commission, CoA 
Department of City Planning

Metropolitan Atlanta 
Rapid Transit Authority, 
CobbLinc, Gwinnett County 
Transit, Georgia Regional 
Transportation Authority

CoA Department of City 
Planning, CoA Mayor’s Office 
of Resilience

3.2.3

3.2.4

3.2.5

Expand bike and car share 
opportunities in underserved 
communities by 2020

Create policies and 
incentives that promote 
use of non-automobile 
transportation methods
Create a single 
transportation app to 
improve user experience 
and use of non-automobile 
modes

Primary: Provides Reliable Communication and Mobility; 
Secondary: Fosters Long-Term and Integrated Planning

Primary: Provides Reliable Communication and Mobility; 
Secondary: Fosters Long-Term and Integrated Planning

CoA Department of City 
Planning, CoA Mayor’s Office 
of Resilience

Primary: Fosters Long-Term and Integrated Planning; 
Secondary: Provides Reliable Communication 
and Mobility, Promotes Leadership and Effective 
Management

Atlanta Regional Commission, 
CoA Information Management 
Department

# of transit riders, particularly in new counties and stations, reduction in total travel time on 
transit with the addition of new service, increase in access to jobs, and resources accessible

Long-term; 2018 
Q4

Partially 
Funded; 
TSPLOST, 
MARTA sales 
tax

% change in ridership of respective transit authorities before and after integration, $ change 
in revenue, changes in car traffic through major thoroughfares

Medium-term; 
2018 Q4 launch

Unfunded

Bike and car share usage rates per location, Air quality measurements at regular intervals, # 
of new bike and care share locations 

Short-term; 2018 
Q2

Partially 
Funded; CoA 
Mayor’s Office 
of Resilience, 
TSPLOST 

% change in parking ratios, # of new parking spaces built, % change in public transportation 
ridership, Transportation demand management programs (TDM)

Medium-term; 
2019 Q1 

Unfunded

# of citizens involved in the transportation planning process, # of unique pageviews of the 
platform/# of downloads of the app

Medium-term; 
2018 Q2

Funded; 
Atlanta 
Regional 
Commission

Target 3.3: Ensure every Atlantan lives within one-half mile of fresh 
food by 2025

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Lead Implementing Partners

Metrics

3.3.1

Develop a resilient local food 
system by 2025

Primary: Meets Basic Needs; Secondary: Supports 
Livelihoods and Employment, Fosters Economic 
Prosperity

CoA Mayor’s Office of 
Resilience, Additional nonprofit 
partners

$ of new economic activity generated by food production and sales, # of new food-related 
jobs created, $ value of locally produced food, lbs of food distributed through emergency 
food assistance, # of people in Metro Atlanta deemed in a ‘food desert’, The Hunger 
Vital Sign™, # of times people buy and consume fresh food items, as identified through 
questionnaire, # of times people are unsure about obtaining their next meal, as identified 
through questionnaire, # of neighborhoods with food plans

132

Timeframe

Funding

Long-term; 2018 
Q2 launch

Partially 
Funded; 
in-kind from 
nonprofit 
partners

133

SUMMARY OF ACTIONS 

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Lead Implementing Partners

Metrics

SUMMARY OF ACTIONS 

Timeframe

Funding

3.3.2

Develop, integrate and 
institutionalize urban 
agriculture into policies, 
programs and projects

Primary: Fosters Economic Prosperity; Secondary: 
Supports Livelihoods and Employment

CoA Mayor’s Office of 
Resilience, Natural Resource 
Conservation Service, 
Groundwork Atlanta

# of acres acquired, $ of sales generated through gross revenue and items sold, # of 
community compost centers created (cubic yard sold)

Long-term; 2016 
Q1 launch 

Partially 
Funded; CoA 
Office of 
Resilience

Target 3.4: Create 500 new acres of publicly accessible greenspace by 
2022

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Lead Implementing Partners

Metrics

Timeframe

Funding

3.4.1

Complete construction of the 
first segment of the Proctor 
Creek Greenway by 2018 

Primary: Enhances and Provides Protective Natural 
and Man-made Assets; Secondary: Provides Reliable 
Communication and mobility, Promotes Cohesive and 
Engaged Communities

CoA Mayor’s Office of Resilience, 
CoA Depatment of Watershed 
Mangement, ReNew Atlanta, 
Atlanta BeltLine, Inc., PATH 
Foundation, Emerald Corridor 
Foundation 

3.4.2

Develop a Parks and 
Greenspace Master Plan by 
2019

Primary: Enhances and Provides Protective Natural and 
Man-made Assets; Secondary: Ensures Continuity of 
Critical Services

CoA Department of City 
Planning, CoA Department of 
Parks & Recreation, Park Pride

3.4.3

Protect and expand Atlanta’s 
tree canopy

Primary: Enhances and Provides Protective Natural and 
Man-made Assets; Secondary: Ensures Public Health 
Services

CoA Department of City 
Planning, City of Atlanta, 
CoA Department of Parks & 
Recreation, CoA Department 
of Watershed Management

Target 3.5: Install sustainable energy- and water-efficient infrastructure 
improvements in and around 500 homes and businesses each year

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

3.5.1

Launch a restaurant water 
efficiency pilot program for 
the City of Atlanta 

Primary: Enhances and Provides Protective Natural and 
Man-made Assets; Secondary: Supports Livelihoods and 
Employment, Meets Basic Needs

3.5.2

3.5.3

Create a stormwater utility 
fee to develop and fund a 
comprehensive stormwater 
management program

Increase use and access to 
solar energy by 2020 through 
the creation of Solarize 
Atlanta

Primary: Ensure Continuity of Critical Services; 
Secondary; Enhances and Provides Protective Natural 
and Man-Made Assets

Primary: Meets Basic Needs; Secondary: Ensures 
Continuity of Critical Services

Lead Implementing Partners

CoA Mayor’s Office of Resilience, 
Metropolitan North Georgia 
Water Planning District,CoA 
Department of Watershed 
Management, Georgia 
Restaurant Association 
CoA Department of Watershed 
Management, CoA Mayor’s 
Office of Resilience, The 
Conservation Fund, American 
Rivers, West Atlanta Watershed 
Alliance

Solar CrowdSource, 
Environment Georgia, 
Georgia Interfaith Power and 
Light, CoA Mayor’s Office of 
Resilience

134

# of new projects and/or businesses directly related to services for the trail, # of trail users 
during the first year, # of sponsored art installations, # of exercises classes conducted along 
the trail, % increase in ridership at Bankhead MARTA station

Short-term; Q1 
2017

$ public and private funding for parks and greenspaces,  # of acres of greenspace added to 
City’s parks inventory, % of Atlantans that live within a half mile of a public park

Short-term; 2017 
Q4 launch

# of acres of forested property purchased and under City management, # of trees planted on 
City-owned properties

Long-term; 2018 
Q2 launch

Fully Funded; 
TSPLOST, PATH 
Foundation, 
CoA 
Department 
of Watershed 
Management

Partially 
Funded; CoA 
Department of 
City Planning

Fully Funded; 
CoA Tree 
Recompense 
Fund

Metrics

Timeframe

Funding

# of WaterSense pre-rinse spray valves installed, # of WaterSense toilets and urinals installed, 
# of restaurants participating, # of gallons conserved, $ change in water bills

Short-term; 2017 
Q4 launch

Volume of pollutants captured by installed Green Infrastructure Best Management Practices 
(BMPs), # of BMPs installed, # of flooding incidents citywide and at U.S. federal Emergency 
Management Agency recognized flood-prone areas,  $ collected through stormwater utility 
fee

Medium-term; 
2017 Q4 Phase 1 
launch

# of residences, nonprofits, and businesses using solar energy, # of megawatts of solar 
capacity installed through Solarize, # of rooftop installations in each sector

Short-term; 2017 
Q4

Fully Funded; 
100 Resilient 
Cities and CoA 
Mayor’s Office 
of Resilience

Fully 
Funded; CoA 
Department 
of Watershed 
Management 

Partially 
Funded; 
Program 
Participants

135

SUMMARY OF ACTIONS 

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Lead Implementing Partners

Metrics

SUMMARY OF ACTIONS 

Timeframe

Funding

3.5.4

Lift the energy burden on 
10 percent of Metro Atlanta 
households

Primary: Meets Basic Needs; Secondary: Promotes 
Cohesive and Engaged Communities, Fosters Economic 
Prosperity

Groundswell, Partnership 
for Southern Equity, 
Georgia Watch, Southface 
Energy Institute, Enterprise 
Community Partners, Georgia 
Power

# of low-income households receiving EASP, HEIP and ABT Program services, # of individuals 
participating in educational workshops, # of energy efficiency kit donation sites established, 
# of low-income families receiving energy efficiency kits

Mid-term; 2017 
Q3 launch

3.5.5

Host a resilient infrastructure 
design competition in 2018

Primary: Enhances and Provides Protective Natural and 
Manmade Assets, Secondary: Empowers a Broad Range 
of Stakeholders

ReNew Atlanta, CoA 
Department of Parks and 
Recreation, Local colleges and 
universities

# of competing school teams, Gallons of stormwater diverted, lbs of Carbon Dioxide 
sequestered, # of pedestrians and bikers per year, # of competing school teams, Reductions 
in vehicle, predestrian and bycicle accidents

Short-term; 2017 
Q3 

Partially 
Funded; 
Georgia Power 
(HEIP and 
EASP funded 
as filed with 
and approved 
by the Georgia 
Public Service 
Commission 
and allocated 
state-wide), 
The Energy 
Foundation, 
JPB 
Foundation

Fully Funded; 
Turner 
Enterprises, 
TSPLOST, 
Rebuild by 
Design

VISION 4: DESIGN OUR SYSTEMS TO REFLECT OUR VALUES
Target 4.1: Adapt and expand City systems to promote resilience 
planning by 2022

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Lead Implementing Partners

Metrics

Timeframe

Funding

4.1.1

4.1.2

4.1.3

Create a City-investment 
checklist to ensure equity 
and resilience in public 
investments

Primary: Fosters Long-Term and Integrated Planning; 
Secondary: Promotes Leadership and Effective 
Management, Ensures Continuity of Critical Services

CoA Chief Equity Officer, 
ReNew Atlanta, CoA 
Department of Finance

# adopted changes in the annual budget, # of completed projects that fit within the 
framework, # of sidewalk, greenspace, road, and green infrastructure installations and/
or improvements, as determined by an annual resilience report card related to public 
investment

Short-term; Q3 
2018 establish 
framework 

Partially 
funded; CoA 
Mayor’s Office 
of Resilience, 
T-SPLOST

Establish a system and 
evaluation process for joint-
infrastructure investments 
by 2020

Primary: Fosters Long-Term and Integrated Planning; 
Secondary: Promotes Leadership and Effective 
Management 

Improve the City’s 
community outreach 
processes to improve efficacy 
and promote transparency

Primary: Empowers a Broad Range of Stakeholders; 
Secondary: Promotes Leadership and Effective 
Management

4.1.4

Improve responsiveness to 
Stormwater Flooding

Primary: Enhances and Provides Protective Natural and 
Manmade Assets; Secondary: Ensures Continuity of 
Critical Services

CoA Mayor’s Office of 
Innovation and Delivery, 
All City general fund 
departments, Atlanta City 
Council, Local, state, federal 
grant funding agencies

CoA Mayor’s Office of 
Communications, CoA Office 
of Constituent Services, CoA 
Atlanta 311

CoA Department of Watershed 
Management, CoA Mayor’s 
Office of Emergency 
Preparedness, Atlanta-
Fulton County Emergency 
Management Agency 

# of new cross-departmental programs implemented, $ change in long-term capital and 
operating budgets, $ change in short-term and long-term repair costs

Long-term; 2018 
Q4

Unfunded 

# of City of Atlanta staff trained, # of complaints via 311, % change in approval ratings of 311 
and city staff

Long-term; 2018 
Q2 launch

Unfunded 

# of potential projects identified resulting in reduction of legacy stormwater projects, # of 
projects identified and included in annual budgeting cycle, # of projects identified for FEMA 
pre-disaster mitigation funding

Short-term; 2017 
Q4 launch

Partially 
Funded; CoA 
“SWIT”

4.1.5

Create a liaison position 
within the City of Atlanta 
by 2020 that focuses on 
improving engagement with 
education organizations in 
the city 

136

Primary: Empowers a Broad Range of Stakeholders; 
Secondary: Fosters Long-Terms and Integrated Planning

CoA Mayor’s Office, Atlanta 
Public Schools

# of projects and programs supported and/or improved by the liaison position, # of 
community events attended by the education liaison, # of slots on the waiting list for pre-K, 
% increase in after-school programming, % increase in recycling initiatives and presentation 
by Atlanta’s Recycling Team

Short-term; 2018 
Q3 launch

Unfunded

137

SUMMARY OF ACTIONS 

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Lead Implementing Partners

Metrics

SUMMARY OF ACTIONS 

Timeframe

Funding

4.1.6

Expand the Equity In 
Sustainability training 
program and develop an 
Equity Strategy among 
sustainability practitioners 
by 2022

Primary: Promotes Leadership and Effective 
Management; Secondary: Enhances and Provides 
Protective Natural and Man-Made Assets

CoA Mayor’s Office of 
Resilience, CoA Chief Equity 
Officer

# of trainings, # of attendees at trainings, # of projects and policies implemented as result of 
trainings and coalition convenings, # of unique neighborhoods receiving programming

Medium-term; 
2019 Q1 launch

Target 4.2: Support policies and systems to increase civic participation 
from Metro Atlantans

Primary: Empowers a Broad Range of Stakeholders; 
Secondary: Promotes Cohesive and Engaged 
Communities

Georgia Institute of 
Technology, CoA Mayor’s Office 
of Resilience

# of residents attending programming at the Lab, # of policy changes or new policies 
introduced as a result of the Lab, # of solutions derived from work at the Lab, # of local 
community members hired at the Lab

Medium; 2018 Q1 
launch

Partially 
Funded; CoA 
Mayor’s Office 
of Resilience 

Partially 
Funded; 
Georgia 
Institute of 
Technology

Partially 
funded; Public 
libraries

Partially 
funded; 
Existing CoA 
budgets

Funded; 
Existing CoA 
budgets

# of library visitors, # of visitors accessing new programming, # of members/ “local library 
friends” organizations

Long-term; 2019 
Q3 launch

Changes to the NPU system as a result of the audit, # of residents attending NPU meetings, 
# of residents participating in NPU leadership, Increase in satisfaction with the NPU system

Long-term; Q2 
Launch 

# of participants visiting online budget information site, # of in-person inquiries at City Hall, 
# of calls to 311 to inquire, # of participants voting in use of funds

Short-term; 2019 
Q2 launch

Service request response times, # of data requests  for future budgetary planning, # of 
notifications from the crowdsource application, City Annual Satisfaction Survey

Short-term; 2018 
Q1 launch

Unfunded

# of residents and organizations utilizing the scorecard tool, # of policy changes as a result of 
scorecard, $ change in revenue and investment due to scorecard results

Long-term; 2019 
Q3 launch

Unfunded

4.2.1

4.2.2

Create a community 
resource center that uses 
design, art, data, media, and 
technology to help residents 
address local issues and 
improve resilience 

Re-envision Public Libraries 
to become focal points of 
community engagement and 
sustainability by 2019

4.2.3

Audit Atlanta’s 
Neighborhood Planning Units

Primary: Promotes Cohesive and Engaged 
Communities; Secondary: Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders

Regional County Public Library 
Systems

Primary: Empowers a Broad Range of Stakeholders; 
Secondary: Promotes Cohesive and Engaged 
Communities, Promotes Leadership and Effective 
Management

CoA Department of City 
Planning , CoA Mayor’s Office 
of Innovation and Performance

4.2.4

Launch a Participatory 
Budgeting pilot by 2020

Primary: Empowers a Broad Range of Stakeholders; 
Secondary: Promotes Leadership and Effective 
Management, Promotes Cohesive and Engaged 
Communities

CoA Office of Budget & Fiscal 
Policy, CoA Mayor’s Office of 
Innovation and Performance

4.2.5

Leverage crowdsourced data 
to improve City systems

Primary: Empowers a Broad Range of Stakeholders; 
Secondary: Fosters Long-Term and Integrated Planning

CoA Mayor’s Office of 
Emergency Preparedness, CoA 
Atlanta 311, Georgia Institute 
of Technology

4.2.6

Create an Equity and 
Resilience Scorecard 

Primary: Fosters Long-Term and Integrated Planning; 
Secondary: Promotes Leadership and Effective 
Management

CoA Smart ATL, CoA Mayor’s 
Office of Resilience, CoA Chief 
Equity Officer, Invest Atlanta

4.2.7

Develop Interfaith Coalition 
and resilience baseline

Primary: Promotes Cohesive and Engaged 
Communities; Secondary: Promotes Leadership and 
Effective Management

Faith Alliance of Metro 
Atlanta, Interfaith Community 
Initiatives, Neshama Interfaith 
Center

# of shared goals developed, # of people served, # of participating faith-based organizations

Long-term; 2018 
Q3 launch

Partially 
Funded; 
Community 
Foundation 
of Greater 
Atlanta, Faith 
Alliance of 
Metro Atlanta, 
Interfaith 
Community 
Initiatives, 
Neshama 
Institute

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Lead Implementing Partners

Metrics

#
138

Timeframe

Funding

139

SUMMARY OF ACTIONS 

Target 4.3: Achieve 100 percent use of clean energy citywide by 2035

Target 4.4: Improve public safety and community preparedness by 
strengthening community cohesion and program evaluation

SUMMARY OF ACTIONS 

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Lead Implementing Partners

Metrics

Timeframe

Funding

4.4.1

Increase the capacity 
of community police 
mentorship programs 

Primary: Ensures Social Stability, Security, and Justice; 
Secondary: Empowers a Broad Range of Stakeholders, 
Promotes Cohesive and Engaged Communities

Atlanta Police Department, 
Atlanta Police Foundation 

$ of funding for the programs, % change in capacity for the programs, # of youth engaged, # 
of police officers engaged, # of police force jobs provided to youth

Short-term; 2019 
Q1 launch 

Partially 
funded; 
Atlanta Police 
Department 

4.4.2

Establish community centers 
to support LGBTQ+ youth in 
underserved neighborhoods 
by 2022

Primary: Promotes Cohesive and Engaged 
Communities;  Secondary: Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders, Ensures Public Health Services 

Georgia Equality, Atlanta 
Coalition for LGBTQ+ Youth

# of community centers created, # of LGBTQ+ youth and young adults served at community 
centers, % decrease in homeless youth population, % decrease in new HIV cases, especially 
among young black males 15-24

Long-Term; 2019 
Q1 launch

Unfunded

4.4.3

Track and evaluate @
Promise Youth Center 
programming

Primary: Ensures Social Stability, Security, and Justice; 
Secondary: Empowers a Broad Range of Stakeholders, 
Fosters Long-Term and Integrated Planning

Atlanta Police Foundation

# of unique users of online dashboard, # of youth diverted from the juvenile justice system 
through @Promise Youth Center programing, # of other neighborhoods that replicate the 
program

Long-Term; 2017 
Q4 launch 

Unfunded

4.4.4

Strengthen community 
disaster preparedness and 
response by 2021

Primary: Promotes Cohesive and Engaged 
Communities, Secondary: Empowers a Broad Range of 
Stakeholders

Target 4.5: Transform Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport as 
a national model for sustainability and workforce development by 2025

CoA Mayor’s Office of 
Constituent Services, CoA 
Department of City Planning, 
Atlanta-Fulton County 
Emergency Management 
Agency, CoA Mayor’s Office 
of Emergency Preparedness, 
Georgia Voluntary Organizations 
Active in Disaster

# of CERT trained residents, # of immigrant communities represented, # of businesses 
participating in emergency preparedness and business continuity planning, # of trained 
personnel registered for VOAD

Medium-term; 
2019 Q2

Partially 
Funded; Urban 
Area Security 
Initiative 

#

Description

Resilience Value to Atlantans

Lead Implementing Partners

Metrics

4.5.1

Launch an Airport Resiliency 
and Sustainability Innovation 
Center by 2023

Primary: Supports Livelihoods and Employment 
Secondary: Fosters Economic Prosperity

Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta 
International Airport, CoA 
Mayor’s Office of Resilience, 
Local post-secondary 
academic institutions 

# of resilience goals developed across multiple sectors, including energy, water management, 
refrigerant/cooling technologies, and hospitality using established standards and rankings, 
such as ISO 5001 certification and Global Reporting Initiative ratings, # of innovative 
technologies tested, # of technologies developed from the resilience hub that are 
implemented at airports or other facilities, # of companies using the maker space, # of 
patents granted to innovators using the resilience space

Timeframe

Funding

Long-term; 2017 
Q4 launch

Unfunded

4.5.2

Make the most traveled 
airport a world-class leader 
in providing livable wage, 
public-transportation 
accessible jobs

Primary: Supports Livelihoods and Employment 
Secondary: Provides Reliable Communication and 
Mobility

Aerotropolis Atlanta, Invest 
Atlanta 

# of people trained, % of different demographics of trainees and employees, # of new jobs 
created, Wages of new jobs created, # of trainees and employees commuting to work using 
MARTA

Long-term; 2016 
Q3 launch

Unfunded

140

141

SOURCES AND CITATIONS

SOURCES AND 
CITATIONS

1.  U.S. Census Bureau, 2016 American Community Survey 1-year Estimates.
2.  Kotkin, Joel. “The Sun Belt is Rising Again, New Census Numbers Show.” Center for Opportunity 

Urbanism, March 2016.

3.  “Plan 2040.” Atlanta Regional Commission, July 2011.
4.  Krogstad, Jens Manuel, “Reflecting a Racial Shift, 78 Counties Turned Majority-Minority Since 2000.” 

Pew Research Center, April 8, 2015.
5.  Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
6.  “The City of Atlanta, Georgia, Comprehensive Annual Financial Report for the Year Ended June 30, 

2014.” City of Atlanta,. December 16, 2014. 

7.  “Georgia Film and TV Production.” Georgia Department of Economic Development, 2017,and Hensley, 

Ellie, “Study: Georgia now No. 1 in feature film productions.” Atlanta Business Chronicle, May 2017.

8.  “What Has Been Filmed Here?” City of Atlanta.  
9.  “Culture Wars.” NPR. March 15, 2017.
10. “ATL Fact Sheet.” Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport.
11.  Berube, Alan, “All Cities Are Not Created Equal.” Brookings Institute, February 20, 2014.
12. Berube, Anal and Natalie Holmes, “Some Cities Are Still More Unequal Than Others – An Update.” 

Brookings Institute, March 17, 2015.

13. “Changing the Odds: The Race for Results in Atlanta.” Annie E. Casey Foundation, 2015. 
14. Immergluck, D., “Examining Recent Declines in Low-Cost Rental Housing in Atlanta, Using American 
Community Survey Data from 2006 - 2010 to 2009 - 2013: Implications for Local Affordable Housing 
Policy.” October 2015.

15. “Housing Affordability Challenges in the Atlanta Metro Area,” Center for Housing Policy, 2014.
16. “City of Atlanta 2016 Comprehensive Development Plan,” City of Atlanta, 2016.
17.  “Drought Status.” Clean Water Campaign. http://northgeorgiawater.org/current-water-stats/drought-

status/ 

18. National Weather Service, NOAA.
19. “Think It’s Hot Now? Just Wait.” New York Times, August 20, 2016.
20.  “2014 Georgia Infrastructure Report Card.” American Society of Civil Engineers, January 13, 2014.  
21.  “Changing the Odds: The Race for Results in Atlanta”, Annie E. Casey Foundation, 2015.
22. “Georgia Film and TV Production.” Georgia.org, www.georgia.org/industries/entertainment/georgia-

film-tv-production/ and “Culture Wars” Npr.org. March 15, 2017  http://www.npr.org/sections/
therecord/2017/03/15/520133445/culture-wars-trap-innovation-atlanta-hip-hop

23. Hawkins, D.D.,Johnson, T.A. Alvarez, J. “The Chicago Dinners: A Model for Community Engagements 
and Social Change, Racism in America. In The Psychology of Prejudice and Discrimination, (Volume 1 
Chapter 10), Westport, CT: Praeger Press Inc. 

24. Employment Status, 2011 – 2015, American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates.” U.S. Census Bureau. 
25. CoStar, 2017.

SOURCES AND CITATIONS

26. “Children’s Outcomes Through First Grade: Findings from Year 3 of Georgia’s Longitudinal Study,” Frank 

Proter Grahamn Child Development Institute, August 2017. http://fpg.unc.edu/resources/childrens-
outcomes-through-first-grade-findings-year-3-georgias-pre-k-longitudinal-studyProter Grahamn Child 
Development Institute, August 2017. http://fpg.unc.edu/resources/childrens-outcomes-through-first-
grade-findings-year-3-georgias-pre-k-longitudinal-study

27. “Benefits of Universal Pre-K and “3-K for All.” The Century Foundation, April 2017. https://tcf.org/

content/commentary/benefits-universal-access-pre-k-3-k/  and “Georgia’s Pre-K Program welcomes 
over 84,000 Four Year Olds.” Georgia Department of Early Care and Learning. http://decal.ga.gov/
documents/attachments/prekfirstday2017.pdf

28. State of Georgia - Department of Juvenile Justice, Descriptive Statistics FY 2013.State of Georgia - 

Department of Juvenile Justice, Descriptive Statistics FY 2013.

29.  Report of the Georgia Council on Criminal Justice Reform, February 21, 2017.
30. Pager, Devah and Bruce Western. “Investigating Prisoner Reentry: The Impact of Conviction Status on 
the Employment Prospects of Young Men.” National Criminal Justice Reference Service. October 2009.

31. “2012 Survey of Business Owners.” U.S. Census Bureau.
32. Moen, J. “Atlanta’s Model Future Urban Green Spaces.” GreenBiz.Com, August 4, 2017. https://www.

greenbiz.com/article/atlantas-model-future-urban-green-spaces 

33.  Policy Map
34. Tomer et al., “Missed Opportunity: Transit and Jobs in Metropolitan America.” Brookings, May 2011. 
35. “Welcome to Aglanta!” Modern Farmer, February 2,2017. http://modernfarmer.com/2017/02/welcome-

to-aglanta/

36. “State of Atlanta’s Greenspace.” Prepared by Wallace Roberts & Todd, LLC, February 2008.
37. City of Atlanta Department of Watershed, Water Rates.
38. Hunt, April, “Claim about Atlanta’s affordable housing hits the mark.” Politifact.com, September 25, 

2017. http://www.politifact.com/georgia/statements/2015/sep/25/matthew-charles-cardinale/claim-
about-atlantas-affordable-housing-hits-mark/ 

39. “MARTA at a Glance.” MARTA. http://www.itsmarta.com/MARTA-at-a-Glance.aspx 
40. State of Georgia - Department of Juvenile Justice, Descriptive Statistics FY 2013.
41. “ATL Fact Sheet.” Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport. http://www.atl.com/about-atl/atl-

factsheet/

42. “Review of the LGBTQ Youth Homelessness Prevention Initiative Planning Phase.” The U.S. Department 

of Housing and Urban Development, April 2016.  

43. “Atlanta by the Numbers.” Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs, Partnership for a New American 

Economy. http://www.welcomingatlanta.com/atlanta-by-the-numbers/

142

143

STRATEGY ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

STRATEGY
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  are  proud  to  be  the  first  city  in  the  Wave  Three  Class  of  the  100RC 
Network  to  release  our  Strategy.  Resilient  Atlanta  would  not  be  possible 
without  the  tremendous  support  of  Metro  Atlanta  residents,  as  well  as  the 
academic, faith-based, nonprofits, philanthropic, government, and business 
communities. This  Strategy  represents  the  collective  ideas  and  insights  of 
stakeholders throughout our region. The City of Atlanta’s Mayor Kasim Reed 
and the Mayor’s Office of Resilience offer our heartfelt thanks and gratitude. 
The  publication  of  Resilient  Atlanta  does  not  symbolize  the  end  of  our 
stakeholder engagement but rather the beginning of a bright, collaborative 
future dedicated to advancing resilience in Atlanta, together.

RESILIENT ATLANTA STRATEGY TEAM 
Stephanie Stuckey, Chief 
Resilience Officer
Cicely Garrett, Deputy Chief 
Resilience Officer
Ria Aiken, Director of 
Emergency Preparedness
Royce Brooks, Chief Equity 
Officer

Yeou-Rong Jih, Project 
Manager
Dr. Jairo Garcia, Director of 
Climate Policies
G. Boyd Leake, Senior Policy 
Advisor
Justin Brightharp, Alternative 
Fuel Vehicle Technical Advisor

Will Anderson, 
Communications Manager
Marinangeles Gutierrez, 
Strategy Fellow
Diondra Powers, 
Communications Fellow
Timothy Cook, Data Analyst 
Nancy Haber, Data Analyst

MAYOR’S OFFICE OF RESILIENCE  

Elizabeth Beak, Sustainability 
Planner
Tyrone Brooks, Grants 
Manager
Mario Cambardella, Urban 
Agriculture Director
Jennifer Carlile, Water Policy 
& Waste Reduction Specialist

Natasha Dyer, Recycling 
Program Coordinator
Valerie McKibben, Recycling 
Coordinator
Shannan Miller, Operations 
Director
Ruthie Norton, Deputy 
Director of Sustainability

Megan O’Neil, Energy 
Programs Manager
Ernest Robinson, Recycling 
Education and Waste Diversion 
Specialist 
John R. Seydel III, Director of 
Sustainability
Michelle Wiseman, Director 
of Waste Diversion & Outreach

100 RESILIENT CITIES
Otis Rolley, Regional Director, 
North America
Charlotte Couturier, 
Associate, City and Practice 
Management

Don Weigel, Manager, 
Global Communications and 
Marketing 
Smita Rawoot, Associate 
Director, City Solutions

STRATEGY PARTNER: HR&A ADVISORS

Asima Jansveld, Project 
Rachel Isacoff, Project 
Advisor
Manager
Rebecca Lassman, Project 
Phillip Kash, Project Director 
Analyst
Stan Wall, Project Advisor
CITY OF ATLANTA EXECUTIVE OFFICES
The Mayor
311 Technology 
Communications
Constituent Services
Contract Compliance
Cultural Affairs
Emergency Preparedness
Enterprise Assets Management

Film & Entertainment
Human Services
Immigrant Affairs
Innovation Delivery & 
Performance
Intergovernmental Affairs
International Affairs
Municipal TV Production

CITY OF ATLANTA DEPARTMENTS

Atlanta Citizens Review Board         
Atlanta City Council
Atlanta Information 
Management
Audit 
Aviation
City Planning
Corrections

Ethics 
Finance
Fire Rescue
Human Resources
Law
Parks & Recreation
Police
Procurement

GLOBAL CHIEF RESILIENCE OFFICERS

Elliott Cappell              
Toronto, Canada
Beck Dawson                
Sydney, Australia
DeVon Douglass               
Tulsa, USA
Kiran Jain                    
Oakland, USA

Craig Kesson                     
Cape Town, South Africa
Lina Liakou             
Thessaloniki, Greece
Sébastien Maire               
Paris, France
Dr. S. Atiya Martin       
Boston, USA

STRATEGY ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Michelle Mueller, Associate, 
City Solutions
Andrew Salkin, Senior VP, City 
Solutions
Michael Berkowitz, President
 

Emily Marsh, Project Analyst
  

Resilience 
The Chief Equity Officer 
The Chief Operating Officer      
The Chief of Staff
Special Events
Women’s Entrepreneurship 
Initiative

Department of the Public 
Defender 
Public Works
Solicitor 
Watershed Management
Executive Offices 
Judicial Agencies 

Christine Morris           
Norfolk, USA
Daniel Zarrilli                     
New York City, USA  

144

145

STRATEGY ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

STEERING COMMITTEE

Judy Adler
John Ahmann
Joel Barker
Tamara Barker
Michael Black
Renay Blumenthal
Bill Bolling
Catherine Buell
Rodney Bullard
Meria Carstarphen
Roosevelt Council
Ann Cramer
Faye DiMassimo

Duriya Farooqui
Art Frazier
Dan Gordon
Lisa Gordon
Michael Halicki
Jennifer Hirsch
Doug Hooker
Scott Jenkins
Bruce Karas
Tim Keane
Katie Kirkpatrick
Eloisa Klementich
Cathryn Marchman

Kate McGregor Mosley
Penny McPhee
Paul Morris
Melissa Mullinax
Ed Munster
Keith Parker
Alicia Philipp
Kishia Powell
Kasim Reed
Robert Reed
Michael Robertson
Samir Saini
Kathleen Toomey

 
WORKING GROUP CO-CHAIRS 
Mike Alexander, Atlanta 
Regional Commission
Kate Atwood, ChooseATL
Bill Bolling, Food Well Alliance
Carl DiSalvo, Georgia Institute 
of Technology
 
WORKING GROUP INTERNAL LEADS

Ayana Gabriel, Arthur M. 
Blank Family Foundation
Dr. Na’Taki Osborne Jelks, 
Phd, MPH, Proctor Creek 
Stewardship Council
Ben Limmer, MARTA

James Roland, Emory 
University
Iris Tien, Georgia Institute of 
Technology
Mtamanika Youngblood, 
Historic District Development 
Corporation  

Heather Alhadeff, City 
Planning, Office of Mobility
Heather Hussey-Coker, 
Atlanta BeltLine, Inc.

WORKING GROUP MEMBERS

Rodney Milton, City Planning, 
Office of Housing and 
Community Development 
Michael Robertson, 
WorkSource Atlanta

Susan Rutherford, Watershed 
Management
Erica Smith, Invest Atlanta
Kent Spencer, Invest Atlanta

John Adams
Marwan Al-Mukhtar
Cotena Alexander
Rohit Ammanamanchi
Courtney Anderson
Jill Arrington
Rocky Atkins
Leah Austin

146

Scott Ball
Capt. Maurice Bates
Mindy Binderman
Michael Black
Andrea Boone
Wesley Brooks
Catherine Buell
Sandra Bush

Dan Calvert
Cheryl Chatman
Mark Coleman-Mabry
Jessica Daman
Nedra Deadwyler
Maria del Mar Ceballos
Dominique Derbigny
Thomas Dibble Dempsey

STRATEGY ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Faye DiMassimo
David Emory
Chandra Farley
Nancy Flake Johnson
Amari Foster
Don Francis
Lisa Frank
Dieter Franz
Page Gardner
Idrissa Gaye
Eyiinahn Glay
Seymour Goodman
Lisa Gordon
Linda Grabbe
Jenn Graham
Paula Grant
Ryan Gravel
Emily Haar
Anne Haimes
Michael Halicki
Jennifer Hall
Jim Hartzfeld
Dietra Hawkins
Harold Hershberg
Amanda Hill-Attkisson
Jenny Hirsch
Jenny Hoffner
Heather Hussey-Coker
Dan Immergluck
Melissa Johnson
Peggy Johnson
Bem Joiner

Brandon Jones
Sagirah Jones
Ronny Just
Azizah Kahera
Matthew Kallmyer
Mindy Kao
Becky Katz
Nicole Kennard
Charlotte King
Adria Kitchens
Charleen Knox Moody
John Lavelle
Michael Lucas
Camilo Marin
Charles Marshall
Greg Mason
Owen Mathews
Lisa McConnell
Brionté McCorkle
Allie Miller
Samara Minkin
Glenn Mitchell
Tara Mitchell
Missy Moore
Tracy Mosely
Eric Nankervis
Josh Noblitt
Tom Owen
Rachel Parish
Dwayne Patterson
Kris Patterson
Shantay Pitre

Shannan Reaze
Ursula Reynolds
Katherine Rice
Detria Russell
Susan Rutherford
Shannon Sale
Neil Sardana
Jabu Sengova
Rebecca Serna
Marshall Shephard
Susanne Spicca
Shawn Stallworth
Julie Swann
Cole Thaler
Stephanie Thomas
Alex Trachtenberg
Tene Traylor
Jelani Trexlar
Taiza Troutman
Raina Turner
Steven Van Ginkel
Calvin Vismale
Jim Voris
Katie Ward
Becky Wellman
Ashley Williams
Amy Willis
Gloria Woods
Wanda Yancey Rodwell
Aisha Yaqoob
Doug Young

147

STRATEGY ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

ORGANIZATIONAL SUPPORTERS

Organizational  supporters  are  community,  nonprofit,  and  private  sector  organizations  that 
have supported the Mayor’s Office of Resilience with the development Resilient Atlanta. Please 
know  that  if we  missed  anyone,  it was  not  intentional. We  appreciate  the  support  from  so 
many outstanding partners.

Adamsville Recreation Center
Aerotropolis Atlanta
Al-Farooq Masjid of Atlanta
American Community Garden 
Association
American Jewish Committee 
Atlanta 
American Rivers
 Asian Americans Advancing 
Justice - Atlanta
AT&T Georgia
ATL is Ready
Atlanta BeltLine Partnership
Atlanta BeltLine, Inc.
Atlanta Bicycle Coalition
Atlanta Board of Education
Atlanta Business Chronicle
Atlanta Business League
Atlanta City Studio
Atlanta Committee for 
Progress
Atlanta Community Food Bank
Atlanta Convention & Visitors 
Bureau
Atlanta Farmers Alliance
Atlanta Friends Meeting
Atlanta-Fulton County 
Emergency Management 
Agency
Atlanta-Fulton Public Library 
System
Atlanta Habitat for Humanity
Atlanta History Center
Atlanta Housing Authority
Atlanta Jobs With Justice

148

Atlanta Metropolitan State 
College
Atlanta Neighborhood 
Development Partnership, Inc.
Atlanta Planning Advisory 
Board
Atlanta Police Foundation
Atlanta Public Schools
Atlanta Regional Collaborative 
for Health Improvement
Atlanta Regional Commission
Atlanta Speech School
Atlanta Tree Conservation 
Commission
Atlanta University Center 
Consortium
Atlanta Volunteer Lawyers 
Foundation
Bank of America
Black Lives Matter Atlanta
Both and Partners, Inc.
Bright from the Start: Georgia 
Department of Early Care and 
Learning
Buckhead Community 
Improvement District
Callanwolde Fine Arts Center
Captain Planet Foundation
Center for Civic Innovation
Center for Civil and Human 
Rights
Center for Sustainable 
Communities
Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention
Central Atlanta Progress 

Chattahoochee Riverkeeper
Chick-fil-A Foundation
Children’s Healthcare of 
Atlanta
ChooseATL
Civic Dinners
Clark Atlanta University
Cobb County Public Library 
System
CobbLinc 
Collective Wisdom Group
Community Farmers Markets
Community Foundation for 
Greater Atlanta
Concerned Black Clergy of 
Metropolitan Atlanta, Inc.
Coxe Curry & Associates
DeKalb County Public Library
Delta Air Lines 
Ebenezer Baptist Church
Emerald Corridor Foundation
Emory University
Enterprise Community 
Partners
Environment Georgia 
Environmental Protection 
Agency Region 4
Ernst & Young
Faith Alliance of Metro Atlanta
Food Well Alliance
Fulton County Board of 
Commissioners 
Fulton County Board of Health
Georgia Budget & Policy 
Institute

STRATEGY ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Georgia Conservancy
Georgia Department of 
Agriculture
Georgia Early Education 
Alliance for Ready Students
Georgia Environmental 
Protection Division
Georgia Equality
Georgia Farmer’s Market 
Association
Georgia Film Academy
Georgia Film, Music, and 
Digital Entertainment Office
Georgia Food Bank Association
Georgia Food Industry 
Association
Georgia Food Oasis
Georgia Institute of Technology
Georgia Interfaith Power & 
Light
Georgia Organics
Georgia Recycling Coalition, 
Inc. 
Georgia Regional 
Transportation Authority
Georgia Restaurant 
Association 
Georgia Solar Energy 
Association
Georgia STAND-UP
Georgia State University
Georgia Transportation 
Alliance
Georgia Voluntary 
Organizations Active in 
Disaster
Georgia Watch
Grady Health Foundation
Groundswell
Groundwork Atlanta
Gwinnett County Public Library
Gwinnett County Transit 

Hands on Atlanta
Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta 
International Airport
Historic Westside Gardens
Housing Justice League
Intent Solutions, Inc. 
Interfaith Community 
Initiatives
Invest Atlanta
Latin American Association
Learn4Life
Livable BuckheadLiving Walls
Mercedes-Benz Stadium
Metro Atlanta Chamber of 
Commerce
Metro Atlanta Region 
Education Partnership
Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid 
Transit Authority (MARTA)
Metropolitan North Georgia 
Water Planning District
Midtown Alliance
Morehouse College
Morehouse School of Medicine
Natural Resource Conservation 
Service 
Neighborhood Planning Units
NeighborWorks
Neshama Interfaith Center
One Small Change, Inc.
Organix Matters
Our Future Atlanta
Park Pride
Partners for HOME
Partnership for Southern 
Equity
PATH Foundation
PEDS
Perkins+Will
Points of Light

Proctor Creek Stewardship 
Council
Prosperity Now
Purpose Built Communities
Quality Care for Children
Quest Community 
Development Organization
Rainbow PUSH Coalition and 
Citizen Education Fund
Ray C. Anderson Foundation
Reach Out and Read
re:imagine/ATL
Robert W. Woodruff 
Foundation
Roman Catholic Archdiocese 
of Atlanta
Rubicon Global
Sierra Club
Sixpitch
Soccer in the Streets
Solar CrowdSource 
Southeast Energy Efficiency 
Alliance
Southern Education 
Foundation
Southern Environmental Law 
Center
Southface Energy Institute
South West Atlanta Growers 
Cooperative
Spark Corps
Spelman College
The Annie E. Casey Foundation
The Arthur M. Blank Family 
Foundation
The Carter Center
The Clean Air Campaign
The Coca-Cola Company
The Coca-Cola Foundation
The Come Up Project
The Common Market Georgia

149

STRATEGY ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

STRATEGY ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The Common Market Georgia
The Conservation Fund
The Home Depot
The Kendeda Fund
The Nature Conservancy
The Trust for Public Land
Trees Atlanta
Truly Living Well
Turner Field Benefits Coalition
Turner Foundation
United Parcel Service

United Way of Greater Atlanta
University of Georgia
Urban Areas Security Initiative
Urban Land Institute
Urban League of Greater 
Atlanta
U.S. Department of Agriculture
U.S. Green Building Council
U.S. Pan Asian American 
Chamber of Commerce 
Education Foundation

Vision To Learn
WABE
Wells Fargo
West Atlanta Watershed 
Alliance
Westside Future Fund
Westside Works
Wholesome Wave Georgia
WonderRoot
YMCA of Metro Atlanta

 

 

150

151

