engage.

1

RESILIENT LOUISVILLEResilient Louisville
June 10, 2019

100 Resilient Cities 
Louisville Resilience: Executive Summary 

VISION 01: EMBRACE LIFELONG LEARNING 
VISION 02: ENSURE A SAFE + HEALTHY CITY 
VISION 03: BUILD A VIBRANT ECONOMY + PLACE  
VISION 04: MAXIMIZE INNOVATION + CIVIC ENGAGEMENT 

Contents

01  
02 
03  Our City Today 
04  Our City Tomorrow  
 
 
 
 

 

 

Next Steps 
Thank You 
Appendices 
 
 
 
 
 

Image Credits
Actions and Action Owner List
Previous and Ongoing Plans
Stakeholder Engagement Summaries
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals

11
19
39
55
62
80
128
164

185
189
195

2

3

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLE"We are only as resilient as the least 
resilient of us. It’s easy to generalize, 
but if one person is left behind, it’s 
up to us all to lift them up. 
In a city, everything and everyone is 
connected.” 
 
—Mayor Greg Fischer

Letter from our 
Mayor, 
Greg Fischer

It’s appropriate that we’ve gathered to talk about resilience in the 
hometown of Muhammad Ali. The Champ shook up the world 
with his resilience as a champion athlete, civil rights leader and 
humanitarian. 

He cultivated the resilience that made him The Greatest by doing 
what he called “the road work,” the sometimes challenging daily 
work of training, of building his strength and endurance, of listening 
to his trainers and managers, and having ambitious goals in mind for 
his future. 

Ali provides a role model for people around the world, and for 
our community as well.  Our goal is to become an even more 
compassionate city, a city where everyone’s human potential can 
flourish.

Cultivating resilience is critical to achieving that goal, because we 
must be prepared for challenges and setbacks as we prepare for the 
future in a world where everything is changing – our economy, our 
society, our technology and even our climate.  

That’s why we are proud that Louisville was named one of the 
100 Resilient Cities in 2017 by the Rockefeller Foundation. We’re 
grateful for the connections we are able to make with other cities 
around the globe facing the same challenges we face, all of us 
looking for solutions. We also are grateful to the members of 
the Louisville Resilience Steering Committee and to everyone in 
Louisville who has taken on the cause of building our city’s resilience 
and provided ideas, feedback and showed their concern and 
passion for working together to build our community’s future. 

created 80,000 new jobs;

Since 2011, in the shadow of the Great Recession, our city has: 
• 
•  opened 2700 businesses; and
•  welcomed $14B in capital investment, including nearly $1 billion 

in west Louisville. 

That is the big-picture economic growth to be proud of, but we have 
to do more to make sure that as a city, we’re built for a future filled 
with both opportunities and challenges. 

Those challenges include everything from a city budget severely 
impacted by state-mandated changes in our employee pension 
obligation, to inequity, to a recent report from the U.S. Army Corps 
of Engineers predicting a serious increase in storms, floods, droughts 
and more in the decades ahead. 

To meet these challenges, we will continue to work with our state 
government for more tools and local options for revenue to support 
the vital services and infrastructure that allow any city to function.  
We will maintain our ties to the global sustainability community  
by aligning the Visions in this document with the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals. This alignment also deepens the 
connection of this work to our partners at the University of Louisville 
and its Envirome Institute.

We must be ready to meet the challenges of the future by creating 
paths to opportunity – and resilience – for our most vulnerable 
citizens. That’s why we’re focusing on making Louisville a city of 
equity, a city where every citizen has access to a great education, 
career opportunities, quality health care, housing and the means to 
create a successful life for themselves and their families. 

The Resilience process reinforced the goals we are pursuing through 
the Mayor’s Strategic Plan, and give us a blueprint for how to bring 
all the current and future efforts together to build a more Resilient 
Louisville. 

Resilience, equity, compassion and the trust we’re working to build 
between our citizens and city government and among our diverse 
communities will make us a stronger, healthier city. That’s our 
ambitious goal and we are committed to following Ali’s example, 
doing the road work, alongside our citizens to make that vision a 
reality for our great city. 

Since 2011, in the 
shadow of the Great 
Recession, our city has:

created 80,000 
new jobs;
opened 2700 
businesses; and
welcomed $14B in 
capital investment, 
including nearly 
$1 billion in west 
Louisville. 

4

5

As we look ahead, we see opportunities and challenges.  Our overall 
economy is strong. 

Sincerely,
Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLELetter from 
100 Resilient Cities,
Michael Berkowitz

On behalf of everyone at 100 Resilient Cities, I want to congratulate 
Mayor Greg Fischer, Chief Resilience Officer Eric Friedlander, and 
the entire Louisville community on the release of the city’s first 
resilience strategy. Resilient Louisville may be produced by Louisville 
Metro Government, but it is truly a strategy whose creation and 
implementation are owned by the city’s residents. 

The time and energy that so many people devoted to its 
development ensured that the work of building a more resilient 
Louisville is grounded in the needs and desires of the community 
and is reflective of the diversity of experiences that make this such 
a vibrant, dynamic, and innovative city. From the outset Louisville 
has taken a deeply self-reflective, participatory, and human-centered 
approach to thinking about resilience, through an unwavering focus 
on the enduring legacy of racism, a commitment to meaningful 
and representative participation in the planning process, and a 
recognition that a resilient Louisville must enable every individual 
and community to thrive. 

Building upon work the city already has done, the grounding of 
resilience in the values of equity, compassion, and trust provides a 
strong foundation from which to move forward. Since joining the 
100RC network, Louisville has experienced more than its fair share 
of shocks and stresses, including record-setting rain and flooding, a 
heartbreaking racially-motivated shooting, and a lack of government 
funding. 

Through its four visions and corresponding actions – Embrace 
Lifelong Learning; Ensure A Safe + Healthy City; Build a Vibrant 
Economy + Place; and Maximize + Innovate Engagement – this 
strategy will help prepare Louisville to thrive no matter what shocks 
and stresses it may face. 

While the release of Resilient Louisville marks a critical milestone in 
the city’s resilience journey, we recognize that the work is far from 
over. The real work is just beginning as Louisville Metro Government 
and its community partners take on the task of implementing the 
actions outlined here. In tandem with the Mayor's Strategic Plan, we 
are confident that Resilient Louisville will achieve lasting impact for 
the city.

We look forward to watching this work as it progresses and to seeing 
a more resilient Louisville where all residents can learn, live, thrive, 
and engage today and for generations to come.

Sincerely,

Michael Berkowitz
President, 100 Resilient Cities 

6

7

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLE"The people who are often the first to 
be hurt in catastrophes, big or small, 
sudden or slow, are often the people 
who have the least resources. 

Cities must plan for how to respond 
to the shocks and stresses found at 
the intersection of race, poverty, the 
environment and the economy."

—Eric Friedlander

Letter from our 
Chief Resilience 
Officer, 
Eric Friedlander

I have called Louisville my home since my birth. When my 
involvement in the Louisville Resilience process began, everyone 
asked me, “What does Resilience mean?” I had two responses: first, 
I would ask “What does it mean to you?”; and, second, "That’s what 
we are going to find out together."
  
This began a journey to establish what Resilience means for 
Louisville. Throughout this process it was apparent that as 
Louisvillians we are proud of our traditions, are willing to work on 
our full understanding of our past and are hopeful for our future 
– a future that leads to greater understanding and prosperity for 
everyone in our community.

Louisville has always faced challenges from typhoid and yellow fever 
to floods and tornadoes as well as from slavery and institutional 
racism to redlining and misguided Urban Renewal policies. 
We continue to struggle with segregated housing, educational 
disparities, aging infrastructure, a lack of affordable housing, and 
the will to agree on how to pay for mitigation of these circumstances 
and to make the wise and necessary investments in our community.   
Trauma, whether from a shock or stress, is still trauma.  How 
we address equity and work on mitigating trauma across Metro 
Louisville will determine the true nature of our resilience.

A Resilient Louisville builds on our strengths as a community.  
Louisville has established the goal of being a most compassionate 
city. This call has resonated throughout our community. This is an 
aspirational goal. 

Often community members point out when we fall short of the 
goal of compassion, but our willingness to engage with each 
other on issues that require patience and a willingness to lean into 

difficult discussion and realizations is vital to our progress as a more 
compassionate and resilient city.

Louisville will become a more Resilient city as we learn how we are 
interconnected as an entire community. From the individual who is 
homeless to the board chair of our largest corporations, a city can 
only be as resilient as its most vulnerable residents.  

Every Vision, Goal and Action in the Resilient Louisville Strategy 
reflects Louisville Resilience Equation: R=E+C+T.  Resilience in 
Louisville equals Equity plus Compassion plus Trust. This plan 
represents the community’s effort to promote greater equity and 
compassion that must lead to greater trust in each other throughout 
this community.

The four Visions call upon all residents to: Embrace Lifelong 
Learning; Ensure a Safe + Healthy City; Build a Vibrant Economy + 
Place; and Maximize Innovation + Civic Engagement.
The 10 goals and 46 actions provide a roadmap for Louisville 
to follow to work together on fulfilling the Louisville Resilience 
Equation.  

It is fortunate that this Resilience Strategy has a strong community 
focus, as the 100 Resilient Cities winds down and as we struggle 
to provide sufficient local investment. This is a Strategy that will 
continue to depend on all of us to engage. It is not solely filled with 
government initiatives. This was done on purpose. Louisville as a 
community has always come together in ways that are broader than 
any single organization. This will be necessary as we move forward 
with this resilience effort.

Sincerely,

Eric Friedlander
Chief Resilience Officer

8

9

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLE01100 Resilient 

Urban resilience is the capacity of individuals, 
communities, institutions, businesses, and 
systems within a city to survive, adapt, and grow 
no matter what type of chronic stresses and 
acute shocks they experience. 

Cities

—100 Resilient Cities

10

11

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLE100 RESILIENT CITIES 100 RESILIENT CITIES About 
100 Resilient
Cities 

100 Resilient Cities (100RC) – Pioneered by The Rockefeller 
Foundation helps cities around the world become more resilient to 
the physical, social, and economic challenges that are a growing 
part of the twenty-first century.

100RC supports the adoption and incorporation of a view 
of resilience that includes not just shocks – such as floods, 
infrastructure failure, and other acute events – but also stresses 
that weaken the fabric of a city on a day-to-day or cyclical basis, 
such as poor air quality, economic hardship, or social inequality.  
By addressing both shocks and stresses in a holistic manner, a city 
becomes better able to respond to adverse events and better able 
to deliver basic functions in both good times and bad.

Louisville joined the 100RC network in May 2016, and through 
its participation in the program, received funding to hire a Chief 
Resilience Officer (CRO) to lead the city’s resilience efforts; expert 
support in developing a resilience strategy; and access to a global 
network of peer cities and practitioners focused on sharing best 
practices and developing solutions to urban resilience challenges. 

THE LOUISVILLE RESILIENCE PROCESS AT A GLANCE
The Strategy process lasted over two years. It began with an Agenda 
Setting Workshop in January 2017, hosted by the City of Louisville in 
partnership with 100RC. More than two hundred stakeholders from 
across the city attended and provided an initial scan of the city's top 
shocks and stresses and started formulating the meaning of resilience 
to the residents of Louisville. In April 2017, Eric Friedlander was 
selected as Louisville's CRO.

During Phase I, the CRO led the City in the creation of a 
comprehensive Stakeholder Engagement Plan to support the 
process. Phase I culminated in two key milestones: The preparation 
of a Preliminary Resilience Assessment (PRA) — a document 
which catalogs existing actions and efforts that contribute to 
Louisville’s resilience, and a prioritization of new resilience-building 
opportunities. The PRA led to the identification of Discovery Areas 
(or focus areas). In the case of Louisville, four Discovery Areas and 
two cross-cutting themes led to the formation of four Working 
Groups around the the topics of equity, compassion, trauma, arts and 
culture, economic opportunity, infrastructure, and health. 

During Phase II, the Working Groups, led by the CRO and his team, 
developed a series of visions, goals, and actions based on the work 
accomplished in Phase I. These visions, goals and actions (included in 
this strategy) are intended to guide Louisville into becoming a more 
equitable and resilient city in the coming decades.  

12

13

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLE100 RESILIENT CITIES 100 RESILIENT CITIES Key Definitions

Key Definitions

The City Resilience Framework

Developed by Arup with support from the Rockefeller Foundation, The City Resilience Framework (CRF) 
provides a lens to understand the complexity of cities and the drivers that contribute to their resilience, 
and a common language that enables cities to share knowledge and experiences. The CRF is built on four 
essential dimensions: Leadership & Strategy, Health & Wellbeing, Economic & Society, and Infrastructure & 
Environment. 

Urban Resilience
Urban resilience is the capacity 
of individuals, communities, 
institutions, and systems within 
a city to survive, adapt, and 
thrive in the face of chronic 
stresses and acute shocks they 

experience.

Stresses 

Stresses are chronic 

conditions that weaken the 
fabric of a city over time  –  
whether it’s on a day-to-day 

or cyclical basis.

Shocks 

Shocks are time-bound 
acute events that can 
significantly impact 

a city.

Qualities of 

Resilient Systems 

REFLECTIVE
ROBUST
RESOURCEFUL
FLEXIBLE
REDUNDANT
INCLUSIVE
INTEGRATED

ABLE TO LEARN

LIMITS SPREAD OF FAILURE

CAN EASILY REPURPOSE RESOURCES  

HAS ALTERNATIVE STRATEGIES

HAS BACKUP CAPACITY

SYSTEMS WORK TOGETHER

BROAD CONSULTATION & 
COMMUNICATION

Effective leadership, 

empowered 
stakeholders, 
and integrated 

planning

The way in 

which man-made 

and natural 
infrastructure 
provide critical 

services 

and protects 
urban citizens

Everyone living 

and working 
in the city 

The social and 

financial 

systems that 
enable urban 

populations to live 

peacefully, 

and act 
collectively

14

15

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLE100 RESILIENT CITIES 100 RESILIENT CITIES CITY BUDGETSHOUSINGENERGYWATERFOODLABORPOLICYSKILLS &TRAININGCONTINUITYFOLLOWINGA SHOCKLOCALBUSINESS DEV.& INNOVATIONACCESS TOFINANCEMEDICALFACILITIES &PRACTITIONERSIN EMERGENCYACCESS TOHEALTHCAREPUBLICHEALTHSOCIALSUPPORTLOCALIDENTITY &CULTURECOMMUNITYPARTICIPATIONDETERRENTSTO CRIMECORRUPTIONREDUCTIONPOLICINGTO PROMOTESAFETY &SECURITYLAWENFORCEMENTBUSINESSCONTINUITYINWARDINVESTMENTLOCALECONOMYECONOMICLINKAGESACCESS TODATA & MONITORINGSTRATEGIES& PLANSLAND USEPLANNINGACCESS TOEDUCATIONRISKAWARENESSBUILDINGCODES &STANDARDSRISKMONITORINGKNOWLEDGETRANSFERCOMMUNICATIONBETWEEN GOVT& PUBLICMULTISTAKEHOLDERALIGNMENTDECISIONMAKING &LEADERSHIPCOLLABORATION& EMPOWERMENTCAPACITY & COORDINATIONTRANSPORTNETWORKTRANSPORTINFRASTRUCTUREREGIONALTRANSPORTCOMMUNICATIONTECHNOLOGYEMERGENCYINFORMATIONLINKEMERGENCYRESPONSEPLANSCONSERVATIONOF ASSETSFLOOD RISKMANAGEMENTECOSYSTEMMANAGEMENTOPTIMAL USEOF CRITICALINFRASTRUCTUREENVIRONMENTALPOLICYSAFEGUARDSFOR CRITICALINFRASTRUCTUREALTERNATIVEPROVISION OFSERVICESEnsures Public SupportsMeetsHealth ServicesLivelihoods &EmploymentBasic NeedsFosters Long-Term ProsperityEmpowers a Broad Stability,Promotes Leadership& IntegratedFosters EconomicRange ofEnsures Social& E(cid:31)ectiveCommunitiesPromotes Cohesive& Engaged PlanningStakeholdersManagementSecurity & JusticeCommunicationOf Critical ServicesAssetsProvides Reliable Ensures Continuity Provides & EnhancesNatural & Man-made & MobilityInfrastructure & EnvironmentEconomy & SocietyHealth & WellbeingLeadership & StrategyLOUISVILLE’SRESILIENCE100RC Network

Louisville joined the 100 Resilient Cities 
network in May 2016, as part of the 3rd 
cohort of cities selected from around the 
globe through a competitive application 
process. This global network is dedicated 
to helping cities around the world become 
more resilient to the physical, social, and 
economic challenges of the 21st century. 
This map represents just a few of the 
inspiring actions underway across the 
100RC Network that Louisville can look to 
for inspiration and collaboration. 

LOUISVILLE JOINED THE 100RC 
NETWORK IN MAY 2016

Through the Digital Equity Challenge, 
NEW ORLEANS utilized a challenge-
based procurement model to develop 
and deliver an arts-based digital 
literacy program to connect its most 
vulnerable residents to economic, social, 
and cultural opportunities through 
technology (Action 3.2.6)

BOSTON created an Economic 
Mobility Lab to advance the upward 
economic mobility of Bostonians 
by analyzing existing programs and 
policies, highlighting and expanding 
effective interventions, and piloting 
innovative, scalable solutions  
(Action 3.2.1)

ATLANTA’S BeltLine Equitable 
Development Plan is advancing housing 
affordability, community health, and 
equitable access to greenspace in 
conjunction with the Atlanta BeltLine, 
a 22-mile transit loop and trail network 
(Action 3.3.2)

TULSA’S “918 Day” is an annual event 
celebrating the city’s diversity, growth, 
and multiculturalism, connecting and 
engaging residents from across the 
city in a day of service and celebration 
(Action 4.1.1)

In response to the opioid epidemic, 
GREATER MIAMI & THE BEACHES 
is piloting an arrest diversion program  
for opioid users, providing individuals  
with access to substance abuse and  
mental health.

DALLAS is working to advance racial 
equity through implicit bias training for 
city employees and the incorporation 
of an equity lens in city budgeting, 
procurement, and service delivery 
(Action 3.1.3, 4.1.3)

In PARIS, the OASIS Schoolyards 
Project is reimagining and redesigning 
school playgrounds to increase green 
space, mitigate urban heat island, 
improve stormwater management, and 
promote broader neighborhood access 
and social cohesion (Action 2.3.1, 2.3.5)

ATHENS, is incorporating Migration 
and Integration Centres and after-school 
community activities and learning 
opportunities as key ways to welcome 
and integrate immigrants (Action 3.3.4)

MELBOURNE is taking a 
comprehensive approach to advancing 
youth resilience, developing a Young 
and Resilient living lab model to 
empower youth and promote individual, 
community and social wellbeing  
(Action 4.1.5)

16

17

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLE100 RESILIENT CITIES 100 RESILIENT CITIES 02

Louisville 
Resilience: 
Executive 
Summary

18

19

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLELOUISVILLE RESILIENCELOUISVILLE RESILIENCELouisville 
Resilience: 
Executive Summary

The Louisville Resilience process involved two years of community 
engagement with stakeholders through interviews, workshops, 
surveys, focus groups, meetings, and social media communication.  
We intentionally sought out to connect with the diverse voices, 
skills, and expertise of our city’s residents, leaders, advocates, 
students, neighborhoods, businesses, non-profits, and faith-based 
organizations with the understanding that the pursuit of resilience 
requires a community effort. 
 
In order to achieve a successful long-term strategic plan, Louisville 
Resilience set forth the following list of goals in executing our 
stakeholder engagement plan:
•  Ensure transparency in our communications with and among all 

stakeholders;

•  Openly acknowledge current gaps in both the support and 

provision of services identified within the City Resilience 
Framework;

•  Facilitate and institutionalize a collective community 

conversation around resilience with the perspective of 
identifying opportunities from our challenges; and

•  Advocate for resilience in all policies for both internal and 

external stakeholders.

The Louisville Metro Health 
Equity report and the Greater 
Louisville Project report on 
poverty document the stark 
differences in life outcomes 
based solely on the zip code 
of one’s birth. 

Pre-Phase

In May 2016, 100 Resilient Cities (100RC) selected Louisville to be 
a member city in its network of cities. 100RC partners with cities 
around the world so that they can become more resilient to the 
social, economic and physical challenges that are a growing part of 
the 21st century. This global partnership provides a platform where 
cities learn from each other and other subject matter experts on 
how to best respond to rapid globalization, urbanization and climate 
change impacts. With this honor, the Louisville community embarked 
on a path of discovery determining attributes that make Louisville 
a more resilient city. We began our 100 Resilient Cities discovery 
process with a two-day Agenda Setting Workshop (ASW) attended 
by over 200 people who gathered from various city sectors and 
industries. The group discussed the topic of resilience and what it 
meant to Louisville moving forward. 

The ASW stakeholders clearly voiced that equity must 
serve as the cornerstone of any resilience strategy. The 
participants identified inequity as one of Louisville’s major challenges 
recognizing the impact of redlining, urban renewal and systemic 
economic exclusion based on race and how these failed policies 
and practices led to a segregated and divided city. The physical 
manifestation of this is called the “the 9th Street Divide.” 

Strategy Development 
Process at a Glance

PRE-PHASE 
Agenda Setting

Workshop

Key Activities

Agenda Setting Workshop 

(ASW)

Selection of CRO

Initial identification of shocks 

and stresses

Initial scan of City Resilience 

Framework

20

Outcomes
ASW Report

Photos from ASW

21

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLELOUISVILLE RESILIENCELOUISVILLE RESILIENCEPhase I

Following the ASW convening, Phase One began when a core 
group of Louisville Metro employees formed. This broad-sector 
team mapped out the next year and a half of resilience work. 

For its first task, the core group formed a Steering Committee 
to inform the process. This selected Steering Committee proved 
unique from both local and 100 Resilient Cities standards in that 
it included no local government representatives. Following our 
intention, we invited individuals typically not on other Louisville 
governing groups asking recognizable Louisville leaders for their 
recommendations for Steering Committee members. This resulted 
in a diverse set of committee members sharing their unique 
perspectives. The Steering Committee guided the direction of the 
initiatives that members believed would lead to a more Resilient 
Louisville, helping design the processes, and informing the 
community questions. 

In conjunction with the steering committee input, we conducted 
individual interviews and focus groups. All community engagements 
- from the Urban League to the Junior League - and the community 
survey results continued to identify the issue of inequity, specifically 
racial inequity, as an overarching concern in Louisville. The 
community engagements not only confirmed the perceived shocks 
and stresses identified by the ASW and the Steering Committee but 
also acknowledged the disparate impact of the shocks and stresses 
on Louisville’s most vulnerable population. 

Who were our Phase I voices?

Our Chief
Resilience 
Officer 

Our 
Core Team

Our Steering 
Committee

Community
Stakeholders

In April 2017, Mayor Greg Fischer appointed Eric Friedlander to be the city’s 
first Chief Resilience Officer (CRO).  The CRO’s primary role is to thoroughly 
explore Louisville’s resilience-building priorities and culminate this analysis in 
this Resilience Strategy. 

The Louisville Resilience Core Team was formed in April, 2017, consisting 
of staff members that represented various departments within Louisville 
Metro Government.  Each member was nominated by his or her respective 
department leadership based upon their passion, expertise, and skill sets.  
The Core Team’s primary roles and responsibilities were: initiate, plan 
and execute Phase I and Phase II; coordinate and lead stakeholder group 
engagement activities; and apply collective skill sets and expertise to 
facilitate a viable Louisville Resilience Strategy.

The Steering Committee is a broad group of approximately 40 subject-
matter experts representing multiple public, private, and community 
sectors. The main role of the Steering Committee was to provide effective 
feedback on the resilience process, including “checks and balances” to 
reinforce a plan that represents the community. The Steering Committee 
was represented by a broad group of subject-matter experts and influential 
representatives of the City Resilience Framework (CRF).  

The Community Stakeholders are identified as individuals and groups 
whose level of influence, roles and responsibilities reflect the work to be 
done.  We identified stakeholder groups based upon Louisville’s communal 
structure and its history of compassion, diversity, talent retention efforts and 
relationship building.  These stakeholder groups are represented by a broad 
group of subject-matter experts and influential representatives of the City 
Resilience Framework (CRF).  

PHASE I 
Strategy 
Initiation

22

Key Activities

Community 
Engagement

Identification of shocks 

and stresses / risk  

assessment

Identification of 
Discovery Areas 

Outcomes

Preliminary Resilience 

Assessment

Customized City 

Approach  

Workshops

Interviews55
1,720 PEOPLE REACHED

PEOPLE REACHED

Focus Groups

Surveys

357
PEOPLE REACHED883 PEOPLE REACHED

23

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLELOUISVILLE RESILIENCELOUISVILLE RESILIENCEPhase II

Following the community engagement process, the Core Team and 
Chief Resilience Officer (CRO) synthesized all information collected 
during the first phase of the Resilience process and identified four 
Discovery Areas setting the stage for Phase Two of the 100 Resilient 
Cities process. We defined the Discovery Areas as: 
•  Enriching Culture of Compassion & Trust; 
•  Enhancing Resilience to Trauma; 
• 
•  Wealth Building & Economic Opportunity; and 
•  Strengthening the Built & Natural Infrastructure that Promotes 

Increase Financial Capacity; 

Health and Wellbeing.   

We began the second phase by inviting the community to 
participate in one or more of the four Discovery Area Working 
Groups. Up to 80 individuals accepted the charge to better 
understand the interrelationship of the shocks and stresses and how 
to address them while building on the perceived strengths of this 
community. 

In collaboration with Louisville’s Office of Performance Improvement 
and Innovation, these structured engagements led each Discovery 
Area Working Group to examine strengths, gaps, barriers, resources 
and strategies reflecting both the ongoing work in the community 
and the opportunity to examine how to better work together on 
common and intersectional issues. The intent was to not only further 
the impact of the work in any one area, but also understand how 
an area related to the overall increase of Louisville’s resilience. At 
the end of the three months, the Working Groups defined those 
interrelated areas and the direction of the Louisville Resilience 
Strategy.  

Who were our Phase II voices?

Our 
Working 
Groups

The Phase II Working Groups included local universities, residents, government 
and non-government organizations, non-profits, faith-based organizations, 
subject-matter experts and core team members.  Their recommendations on 
what a resilient Louisville looks like is highlighted in the actions they identified 
within this strategy document. 

Co-Leads represented (1) Metro Government and (1) Non-Metro Government 
community leader per Discovery Area. Their role was to convene and 
engage the work groups to identify and develop actionable initiatives and 
outcomes to address Discovery Area questions. Their subject-matter expertise 
around community collaborations, plans, and processes was an added value 
enhancement that helped shape the resilience plan. 

01
02
03
04

Enrich a Culture of Compassion and Trust 

Enhance Resilience to Trauma

Increase Financial Capacity, Wealth 
Building and Economic Opportunity

Strengthen Built and Natural 
Infrastructure that Promotes Health 
and well-being

PHASE II 
Strategy 
Development

Key Activities
Working Groups  

   around Discovery Areas 

Identification of Visions, 

Goals and Actions

Outcomes 
Louisville 
Resilience 
Strategy

04

WORKING GROUPS

114

MEMBERS

08

MEETINGS

IMPLEMENTATION 

24

25

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLELOUISVILLE RESILIENCELOUISVILLE RESILIENCESPOTLIGHT
HOW DID LOUISVILLE RESPOND TO TRAUMA?

On October 24, 2018, the city mourned the shocking murder 
of two innocent people at a grocery store in Jeffersontown, 
the result of a hate crime. These photos reflect the trauma-
informed meeting where participants put their frustrations 
on paper. At the end of the meeting, we came together 
determined to make a change in our community.

The Core Team decided that it was important to model a 
trauma-informed approach. As a reflection of how trauma 
impacts people and processes, we devoted a full meeting to 
this tragic event. A meal was provided and all participants sat 
together for dinner and reflection.  Each paper-covered table 
became a canvas for individuals to express in words and art 
how they were processing this tragedy allowing everyone 
to respond as one committed community.  This cathartic 
meeting exemplified a model on how to process traumatic 
events in a group setting.

Not only did the Working Groups tackle some very difficult 
issues in Louisville during the three-month period, but also 
it became apparent that there are ongoing initiatives that 
address many of the challenges identified by the Working 
Groups. The heartening realization for the participants was 
that the issues we are working on are the right issues for this 
community!  

Engagements throughout the community added types of shocks to the list but resoundingly echoed the ASW 
findings. Recognizing that some chronic living conditions generate harmful stress and exacerbate the impact 
of shock, the community engagements identified Louisville’s major stressors as inequality, lack of education, 
poverty, violence and the impact of aging infrastructure. In what was perhaps a prescient moment, the 
community identified lack of government funding as one of our top shocks. While at the time it was related to 
national and state funding, this now reflects the challenges of local funding as well.

Top stresses were identified as inequality specifically as it relates to health, education and the impact of 
aging infrastructure. The only addition to this category was the decline in the natural environment. This 
relates to the rapidly growing urban heat island effect, development pressure on watersheds and the growing 
understanding of the relationship of health to access to green space.

$

$

RIOT/CIVIL  
UNREST

DRUG            

EPIDEMIC

ECONOMIC  

CRISIS

GOVERNMENT 

LACK OF  
FUNDING 

POVERTY

INFRASTRUCTURE 

FAILURE  

Our Shocks 
and Stresses

CRIME AND  
VIOLENCE 

$

$

INEQUITY

LOW PERFORMING 
SCHOOLS SYSTEM

DECLINE OF NATURAL  
& BUILT ENVIRONMENT 

26

27

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLELOUISVILLE RESILIENCELOUISVILLE RESILIENCEA brief retreat with the 100 Resilient Cities team and representatives from Louisville Metro Government led 
to the realization that this work fits well into the existing framework of the Mayor’s Strategic Planning pillars. 
While some modification was necessary, the mayor’s main themes applied to the work of Resilience:  

Our Findings

  
Compassion, trauma, equity, sustainability and economic 
opportunity are the core issues for Louisville’s resilience. 
It clearly was articulated throughout the process that many of the 
issues that we face locally, in the state and in the nation relate to a 
basic lack of trust in institutions. 

Phase I Outcomes
• 
•  Shocks and stresses that came out of the Agenda Setting 

Introduction to the 100RC team and process;

Workshop;

•  The formation of the Louisville Resilience Team and Steering 

Committee;

•  What it takes for Louisville to be resilient; and
•  Our city context, actions inventory, stakeholder and 

communications plan

Phase II Outcomes
•  The community voice aligns the Mayor’s Strategic Plan themes;
•  Resilience equals equity, compassion, and trust;
•  A call to action on ways to ensure all residents have equitable 

opportunities to thrive; 

•  Some of Louisville's greatest strengths are community, 

• 

neighborhoods, culture, opportunity, and networks;
Louisville's greatest barriers are communication, infrastructure, 
resources, and oppression; and

•  Community's response to shocks

Equity
Resilience
Compassion

Safe and 
Healthy City

Lifelong 
Learning

Vibrant 
Economy 
and Place

Innovative 
Operationally 

and 

Excellent 

City 

The core group responded to this by formulating the Louisville 
Resilience equation:  

R = E + C + T

 
Resilience equals Equity plus Compassion plus Trust  
Every action in this strategy document must lead to greater equity, 
compassion and trust.  The Louisville Resilience equation elevates the 
Mayor’s theme of equity and compassion to become the overarching 
aim of the Louisville’s Resilience Strategy.

The other four themes allowed both community initiatives and metro 
actions to be set side by side into a document that reflects the 
entire community.  While the last theme in the Mayor's Plan related 
to operational excellence, this is incorporated in the document as 
excellence in community engagement.

It is important to note that the result of the engagements - the 
Agenda Setting Workshop, steering committee, individual interviews, 
focus groups, surveys and work groups - have directed us to this point. 
The goals and actions in this Strategy are not exclusively owned by 
Louisville Metro Government, they are owned by a broad community 
of stakeholders.  Our belief in the collective impact of all of 
Louisville’s efforts will make Louisville a more resilient city.

28

29

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLELOUISVILLE RESILIENCELOUISVILLE RESILIENCELearning from the 
past, living in the 
present — a place 
to prepare for the 
future. 
A Reflection on Louisville's 
Shocks and Stresses

1968

Riot/Civil Unrest
On May 27, 1968, 400 protested in Louisville’s 
Parkland neighborhood following the death of Dr. 
Martin Luther King, Jr., and a police arrest incident.  
The protest soon escalated to a riot damaging 
property and looting of businesses.  Louisville’s 
Mayor ordered over 2000 Kentucky National 
Guardsmen to control the situation.  In 1975, 
persons protested the court-ordered desegregation 
plan for public school students known as “busing”.

30

31

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLELOUISVILLE RESILIENCELOUISVILLE RESILIENCE1981

Infrastructure Failure
On February 13, 1981, Louisville’s 
sewers exploded destroying 
more than 13 miles of sewer 
lines.  In response the city passed 
a hazardous materials ordinance 
giving the Louisville Metro Sewer 
District the authority to regulate 
the handling of hazardous 
materials. 

2011

Decline of Natural and 
Built Environment
Since 2011, Louisville has planted 
97,974 trees to reduce its urban 
heat island.  Enacted in 2005, the 
Strategic Toxic Air Reduction Program 
(STAR) reveals that emissions of toxic 
chemicals from local industry have 
dropped almost 70 percent.

2016

Crime and Violence
In 2016, there were 123 homicides in 
Jefferson County breaking the previous 
record of 110 set 45 years earlier in 
1971.  However, with Louisville’s efforts 
in implementing violence prevention 
program, we have seen crime drop by 3.3% 
with homicides declining by 30% over the 
last two years.   

33

$

2011

Economic Crisis
Known as the state’s economic engine, 
Louisville’s 2011 unemployment rate rose to 10.3 
percent during the Great Recession. In 2019, 
the rate is below 4% and over 80,000 jobs were 
created in with Louisville reaching post-recession 
highs in both employment and job growth. 

32

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLELOUISVILLE RESILIENCELOUISVILLE RESILIENCE2017

Drug Epidemic
In 2017, 396 people died of an accidental drug overdose in Louisville, 
according to the Jefferson County Coroner’s office, a 22.5 percent 
increase from Louisville’s previous record set in 2016 — a 56% increase 
from the 2015 overdose deaths. In response, Louisville has increased 
addiction harm reduction through its syringe exchange program and 
Treatment Advisory Group collaboration, which connected more 
people to treatment and increased trauma-informed care.

2018

Low Performing Education System 
May 29, 2018, the Jefferson County Public Schools Board of 
Education voted to appeal state management of its school 
system.  A compromise was reached between the Kentucky 
Board of Education and the local board allowing the state to 
control only three areas of the school district. In May, JCPS 
launched a policy to address the longstanding inequities faced 
by its students of color – an effort to close the achievement 
gap ensuring that minority students have equal educational 
opportunities.   

Poverty 

2018

In 2017, the Greater Louisville Project 
“Poverty Beyond Income” report, warned 
that one in five of Louisville’s children 
live in poverty with a median household 
income of $11,000. Of those households, 
67% have at least one person working.  

35

$

$

2016

34

Inequity
Systemic racism policies, such as the practice of “redlining,” 
significantly impacted Louisville’s most vulnerable neighborhoods 
through discriminatory lending prohibiting home ownership 
and inhibiting institutional and familial wealth building.  Today, 
nearly $1 billion in investments has been announced in west 
Louisville.  Significantly, in 2016 the U.S. Department of Housing 
and Urban Development awarded Louisville $29.5 million 
Choice Neighborhoods Initiative to transform the historic Russell 
Neighborhood that is expected to leverage $200 million more 
investment in Russell.  Since 2016, $41 million has been invested 
in affordable housing in Louisville.

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLELOUISVILLE RESILIENCELOUISVILLE RESILIENCESPOTLIGHT
THE HISTORY OF LOUISVILLE'S SIGNIFICANT 
WEATHER EVENTS 
 

1936 Hottest summer on record

Summer of 1936, peaking at 107 degrees, Louisville 
experienced its hottest summer on record coupled 
with the driest June on record.  

1937 The Great Flood

January – February 1937, The Ohio River crested 
33 feet above the flood stage with 70 percent of 
Louisville under water.  175,000 residents escaped 
seeking safety with 90 residents not surviving the 
flood.

1974 A F4 Tornado

April 3, 1974, a F4 tornado touched down in Louisville 
destroying trees in Cherokee Park and destroying 
several homes. 

1994 Snow and Ice

January 1994, Louisville temperature plummeted 
to -22 degrees and 15” of snow fell in a single day 
crippling the city.
2008 Hurricane Ike

September 14, 2008, Hurricane Ike swept through 
the city tearing down 1,400 power lines and leaving 
301,000 people without power – for up to two weeks.

2019 $

Lack of Government 
Funding
In 2019, the Louisville Metro 
Government faced significant 
budget challenges caused largely 
by pension obligation increases 
from the state.  On March 2019, 
Louisville’s governing body voted 
against a plan that was proposed 
to fully address the budget 
challenge.  The city is faced with 
a $35 million shortfall in fiscal 
year 2020 and the state pension 
obligation is anticipated to grow 
by about 12 percent a year. We 
continue working with our state 
leaders and legislators to provide 
revenue options and flexibility for 
cities – a critical reform.           

2009 Freezing Rain

January 2009, a wintry mix moved through Louisville 
with precipitation changing to freezing rain, taking 
down power lines and leaving 205,000 people and 
69 schools without power for up to 10 cold, winter 
days. Emergency shelters were set up to combat the 
freezing temperatures.   

2018 Wettest Year

2018, Louisville’s wettest year on record – reaching 
68.05 inches. 

37

Fourth Street looking South at Broadway 
during the Great Flow, 1937

The Kentucky Post Cover reporting 
on the tornadoes that killed 73 
people and left thousands homeless, 
1973

Gas station damaged by hurricane 
Ike, 2008

36

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLELOUISVILLE RESILIENCELOUISVILLE RESILIENCE—Mayor Greg Fischer03

Our City 
Today

“I see a city that honors and learns from the 
past, lives fully in the present and prepares 
for the future.”

38

39

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TODAYOUR CITY TODAYLouisville

Mayor Fischer’s platform included a focus on environmental 
stewardship, equity, access to services, and sustainability. That 
focus has evolved into a broad base of initiatives that engaged 
and benefited communities across Louisville. These initiatives, 
combined with the City’s focus on long-term planning, create a 
strong foundation for resilience planning in Louisville. As Louisville 
begins its resilience journey, it is important to acknowledge and 
celebrate all the work that the city has done to date, with a forward 
focused lens of what the city could evolve to in the future. This 
chapter establishes the foundation through the organization of 
three lenses; who we are, how we grow and what this means.

•  Our History
•  Our People

•  Knowing our challenges
•  Learning from the past 
•  Envisioning for the future

•  We grow with compassion 
•  We grow with equity 
•  We focus on life long learning 
•  We focus on building a safe 

and healthy place

•  We prepare for the future

40

41

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TODAYOUR CITY TODAYOur History

Our People

Founded in 1778 by George Rogers Clark, Louisville has become 
a vibrant, dynamic mid-sized city located on the banks of the Ohio 
River in north central Kentucky. Today’s community includes a mix 
of urban, suburban and rural areas covering some 386 square miles.  
Historically existing with one foot in the industrial Midwest and one 
foot in the agrarian South, Louisville has been enriched by a number 
of diverse cultural influences including a rich history as a city built on 
immigration.  Even as Louisville developed as a manufacturing city 
connected to inland ports, its primary raw materials were corn and 
tobacco underscoring the city’s growing dichotomy of industrial and 
agrarian. Today, Louisville is a dynamic American city that navigates 
urban and rural characteristics, modern and traditional economies 
and traditional American celebrations like the Kentucky Derby as 
well as global businesses. We benchmark our progress compared 
to other regional mid-size cities such as Birmingham, Cincinnati, 
Indianapolis, Nashville, Pittsburgh and St. Louis. 

The Six Villages at the Falls of the Ohio River

CLARKSVILLE

NEW ALBANY

PORTLAND

WEST LOUISVILLE

R
E
V
I
R
 
O
I
H
O

42

JEFFERSONVILLE

LOUISVILLE

In 2003, the City of Louisville and Jefferson County, Kentucky, joined 
together to form Louisville-Jefferson County Metro Government.  
The merger required the consolidation of every equivalent city and 
county department; however, with everything in flux, it was also 
an auspicious time to begin rethinking processes and procedures. 
Merger also made it easier to reach the area’s growing constituency 
through unified outreach efforts and social marketing campaigns.  
Following the national trend, Louisville’s Hispanic population 
increased rapidly while the African American population also 
increased significantly. 

67%White

Estimated

769,387

Louisville
residents

2.7%
Asian
2.8%
Multiracial
5%
Hispanic 
or Latino

21%
American 

Black or African 

Protesters gathered around Muhammad 
Ali Center for a pro-immigrant rally hosted 
by Mayor Fischer on January 29th, 2016.

43

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TODAYOUR CITY TODAY72.32052.82.40.1102.643%

of the population 
lived in poverty

(2013-2017)

2x

homicide rate of 
African Americans 
compared to all 
other ethnic groups 

combined

Knowing Our 
Challenges

Like most American communities, however, Louisville faces a 
number of serious and interrelated social, economic and health 
challenges: 15% of our population lived in poverty during the 2013-
2017 period compared to the national average of 14.6%1; 22% 
of residents do not have a high school diploma and only 12.30% 
have a graduate or professional degree2. And, as in most American 
communities, the burdens of social and economic disadvantage and 
of ill health in Louisville fall disproportionately on certain population 
subgroups, especially people of color and other minorities. 

In Louisville, the rate of deaths from homicide for African Americans 
is twice that of all other race/ethnic categories combined in the first 
quarter 20193, and rates of both low birth weight and infant deaths 
among African Americans are twice those for whites. Alarmingly, 
residents in some of Louisville’s neighborhoods live 12 years less 
than residents in neighborhoods across Jefferson County.

In response to these challenges, Louisville has taken steps to move 
forward in a way that acknowledges the divisions and inequalities 
created by historical policies such as redlining and urban renewal 
that have undermined wealth building and upward mobility in 
impacted communities. Creating more equitable policies and 
practices is a critical mechanism for building the compassion 
and trust Louisville needs to be a resilient city. Released in 
2017, the Louisville Metro Health Equity Report is a roadmap of 
recommendations to ameliorate inequality through interventions, 
systems improvement, and policy development in health care, 
food systems, and the criminal justice system. The goal of these 
interventions is to mitigate the effects of trauma and nurture healthy 
neighborhoods to create a thriving community.

1 
2 
3 

U.S. Census Bureau, Poverty Estimates 2017
2017 American Community Survey US Census
Louisville Metro Police Department Uniform Crime Report

Economic Context

Unemployment Rate, Louisville. 
Data Source: ESRI Thematic Mapping.

<+4.4%

>+24.1%

The Time We Have

Life Expectancy

Health Context
Life Expectancy Five-Year Average, 2014 - Louisville Metro 
Health Equity Report. Data Source: 2010-2016 Louisville 
Jefferson County Death Records.

Five-Year Life Expectancy Average

79, United States
77.6, Louisville

83, Japan

81, Canada

83.6, St. Matthews
82.4 Northeast Jefferson
82.0, J-town
81.5, Floyd's Fork
80.7, Fern Creek
80.3, Highlands
79.0, Southeast Louisville
77.8, Highview-Okolona
77.0, Pleasure Ridge Park
76.4, Butchertown-Clifton-Crescent Hill
76.2 Valley Station
76.2, South Louisville
75.6, Buechel-Newburg-Indian Trail
74.8, Fairdale
74.5, Shively
73.4, Chickasaw-Shawnee
73.2, Downtown-Old Louisville-University
72.5, Germantown
71.5, Algonquin-Park Hill-Park Duvalle
71.5, South Central Lousiville
69.5, Russell
69.4, Phoenix Hill-Smoketown-Shelby Park
68.3, Portland
67.8, California-Parkland

75, Vietnam

73, Jamaica

69, Iraq

Data Source: 2006-2010 Louisville/Jefferson County Death Records
Life Expectancy formula followed ONS guidelines using Chiang II methodology for small populations

Qualified Census Tract Areas
Jefferson County Boundary

As noted in the previous section, it is important to 

understand the distribution of health status and health 

outcomes. One way to capture a snapshot of the health 
of a community is to examine the life expectancy of the 
different neighborhoods. For simplicity, life expectancy is 
an easy way to communicate the overall adjusted death rate 
in a more readily understandable manner. By definition, 
“life expectancy is the average number of years a person 
can expect to live, if in the future they experience the 
current age-specific mortality rates in the population.”18 For 
example and by referring to the map on the left, if infants 
born in Fairdale today experience exactly the same death 
rates at the same specific ages, they will likely live to 74.8 
years old. However, this is based on current death rates. 
The fact is that environmental and social changes over 
the next 74.8 years will likely occur and impact the true 
longevity of those infants. In this way, life expectancy isn’t 
the fate of the population, but rather a measure of what 
the current environment offers as a whole and a glimpse of 
what the future would hold if we don’t act to change it. Life 
expectancy then becomes a measure of how an environment 
supports or depresses our opportunities for health -- such 
as behaviors, choices, and exposures -- that determine our 
longevity.

This map demonstrates the gradient of life expectancy 

across Louisville Metro using 2006-2010 death records 

to produce average life expectancies by neighborhood. There 
is obvious geographical clustering of lower life expectancies 
concentrated around the downtown and western portion 
of Louisville Metro. This map shows the five-year average 
disparities in how long people live based on where they 
live. This difference results in an 15.9-year gap between the 
highest- and lowest-ranked neighborhoods. 

Although it may appear that just the downtown area 

needs improvement, this only tells part of the story. 

Qualified Census Tract Areas
Jefferson County Boundary

Typical mapping analysis, such as that presented here, can 
visually bias results. The color divisions are relative to the 
average for a specific area or group and should not be taken 
out of context. In this particular case, the map shows the 
differences in life expectancy of neighborhoods by moving 
from light blue (high life expectancy) to dark blue (low life 

0

1.25

2.5

5

Miles

44

Page   15

45

Tell us what you think?

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TODAYOUR CITY TODAYLearning from 
the Past

Shaping our future requires engaging with our past. In early 2019, 
Louisville Metro Government launched Lean Into Louisville – an 
unprecedented series of experiential learning opportunities, 
conversations, activities and art exhibits – to explore and confront 
the history and legacy of all forms of discrimination and inequality.  

Lean Into Louisville studies our historical context by initiating safe-
space, open dialogue and research-based programming to discuss 
the ramifications of redlining, the Jim Crow era, and slavery on 
Louisville’s population. Our goal is to create a meaningful dialogue 
to build a movement toward a more equitable city where everyone 
can thrive.

The 9th Street Divide

“It is like night and day once you cross 
over Ninth Street – you can see the 
difference in wealth, you can see the 
difference in investment than in other 
parts of the city, and you know that it 
literally stops at Ninth Street.”   
– Haven Harrington, III 

Constructed in 1950s and 60s as a major thoroughfare, 9th Street 
destroyed the African-American business district as well as split 
West Louisville from East Louisville. Persons living on the west of 
9th Street have poorer health outcomes and a shorter life span.  
This divide creates “deep roots of inequity” significantly impacting 
quality of life and economic development. 

Envisioning 
the Future

When Mayor Greg Fischer took office in January 2011, he 
established three pillars for transforming Louisville Metro into:
1.  A city of life-long learning; 
2.  A physically, mentally, and socially healthier city; and 
3.  A compassionate city. 

Now in his third term, Mayor Fischer’s pillars have evolved into 
themes that are our foundational platforms for moving forward: 
Lifelong Learning; Equity, Resilience, and Compassion; Safe and 
Healthy City; Vibrant Economy and Place, and Innovative and 
Operationally Excellent City. These themes are wrapped in a value 
system of integrity and transparency leading to a place of trust and 
respect.  

Equity
Resilience
Compassion

Lifelong 
Learning

2019

Safe and 
Healthy City

Vibrant 
Economy 
and Place

Innovative 
Operationally 

and 

Excellent 

City 

46

47

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TODAYOUR CITY TODAYWe Grow with 
Compassion

Mayor Fischer, while staunchly integrating his pillars, ignited a 
brushfire of compassion. On November 11, 2011, Louisville became 
the first large city to sign onto the International Chapter for 
Compassion. The mayor launched the annual Give-A-Day week of 
service to engage citizens in volunteerism and compassionate acts, 
which led to an increase from 80,000 hours and acts of compassion 
to 205,000 hours in 2018. Louisville has experienced a shifting in 
culture and has twice been named an International Model City for 
Compassion and America’s Most Livable Large City. Our culture of 
compassion continues to grow; Louisville is now recognized as a 
leading “welcoming city” by promoting inclusion of all residents.

Our growth as a vibrant economy depends on investing in all areas 
of Louisville guided by compassion with the goal of increasing 
equity. Louisville Forward, Louisville’s regional economic hub, and 
Greater Louisville, Inc., the region’s chamber of commerce, were 
recognized as a Top U.S. Economic Development Group for 2017. 
By 2018 and based upon four-years of business development, 
Louisville Forward helped businesses create nearly 22,000 new 
jobs in Louisville representing an investment of $45.2 billion. These 
investments are making a difference. Like most of the nation, 
Louisville faced high unemployment rates in 2010 - a rate of 11.8 
percent; however, today Louisville Metro’s rate is 3.8 percent 
compared to the nation’s rate of 4.1 percent.

International 
Chapter for 
Compassion

Louisville 
Forward

We Grow with 
Equity

Growing with compassion and equity means extending its benefits to 
all neighborhoods. “The Greater Louisville Project concludes that 
if Louisville’s four poorest neighborhoods, including Russell in west 
Louisville, could be improved to experience city-wide averages for 
health, jobs, income and educational attainment, it would result in 
$377 million in additional earnings, 5,000 fewer low-income children, 
and eight years of additional life expectancy.”1 

Before redlining and intentional policy decisions fragmented the 
neighborhood, Russell was a vibrant and diverse hub of small, 
African-American owned businesses that generated jobs and served 
neighborhood needs. It was a center of African American home 
ownership. Conversely, today only 18% of Russell residents own 
their housing units compared to 62% of all Louisville residents – a 
significant shift. Russell’s former vibrant business district now is 
fragmented due to intentional past policy choices including redlining 
and Urban Renewal and the lack of significant investment that 
followed.

The Greater 

Louisville Project

Mayor's Give a Day Program: Build a Bed volunteer effort
48

49

The redeveloped Beecher Terrace as part of the Vision Russell Transformation Plan will become 
an attractive, safe, gathering space for residents and neighbors. Illustration by Urban Design 
Associates.

1 

Russell: A Place of Promise cited from Louisville: A Focus on Poverty

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TODAYOUR CITY TODAYProject
Spotlight

The Choice Neighborhood Initiative (CNI) is a collaborative effort 
to create and implement a dynamic and transformative plan for the 
Russell neighborhood, including the Beecher Terrace public housing 
development. Called Vision Russell, the initiative’s boundaries span 
from Market Street to Broadway, and from 9th to 32nd Streets. 
The planning phase of this work was funded through a $425,000 
Planning grant from the Department of Housing and Urban 
Development (HUD) that was awarded on January 16, 2015
and matched by a $600,000 leverage contribution from Louisville
Metro Government (LMG). The first phase of revitalization to be
complete in Russell in 2018 is funded by a $1,000,000 HUD Action
grant with $375,000 leverage contribution from LMG, which will go
towards Action Activities-physical projects that will spur additional
community improvement and economic development in the
neighborhood. The $29.5 million HUD Implementation grant was
received on December 12, 2016. These funds will be used over the
next 7 years for the replacement of the Beecher Terrace housing
complex and critical community improvements in the Russell
neighborhood.

Vision Russell Choice 

Neighbourhood 
Vision Russell

Initiative:

Louisville received a

$29.5 
million 

HUD implementation grant

6,200

Youth found 
employment

in 2018

SummerWorks 

Program

We Focus on 
Life-Long Learning

We grow by preparing our youths for life-long learning evolving 
as a part of Louisville’s promise from cradle to career. Identifying 
it as critical for economic development, Mayor Fischer forged a 
movement for Louisville to become a city of life-long learning. “That’s 
critical for any city – and any citizen – with the ambition to thrive in 
the 21st century. It’s the life-long learners who are best equipped 
to adapt and prosper in a world of constant change.” Our efforts 
align community resources helping students succeed in school, work 
and life increasing student achievement and setting the platform 
for life-long learning. Louisville’s young people have opportunity 
to enroll in the SummerWorks youth jobs program gaining the 
experience of employment, developing skill sets, and preparing for 
future employment. In fact, SummerWorks started with 200 young 
people in 2011 and in 2018, 6,200 youth found employment within 
the healthcare system and in other local businesses.  The Academies 
of Louisville, a business/school partnership, equips students with 
relevant learning experiences and skills needed to thrive in the 
global economy of the 21st century.     
 

SummerWorks Program connects youth to summer jobs, 
career opportunities, and supportive networks. 

50

51

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TODAYOUR CITY TODAYWest Louisville 

Outdoor Recreation 

Initiative

Engaging Children 
in the Outdoors 
(ECHO) Program

Safe and Healthy 
Neighborhoods

We grow by having safe and healthy places. On May 17, 2012, 
three young African Americans were killed in West Louisville in two 
separate incidents. Mayor Greg Fischer immediately convened a 
multi-sector workgroup of 37 community members to find solutions 
to violence by developing strategies to prevent violence. One of 
these strategies propelled the West Louisville Outdoor Recreation 
Initiative to create equality for urban youth to experience the 
outdoors. A key purpose is to enhance the community's protective, 
cultural, social and economic factors that among other things would 
promote non-violence. Today, design and construction drawings 
are complete for the Shawnee Outdoor Learning Center, home 
to a nature-based outdoor recreation and education center in the 
Shawnee neighborhood. Over 3,500 youth and adults are engaged 
in Louisville Metro Parks Engaging Children in the Outdoors 
(ECHO) Program – Nearby Nature, Engaged Children, Healthy 
Outcomes - that provides equitable access to nature through in-
school field trips, out of school activities and free community events. 
Based on ECHO, Louisville was selected as one of 50 cities in the 
nation to compete in the Healthiest Cities Counties Challenge and 
was elevated to one of five cities in its category.           

Prepare for 
the Future

Unity: a significant word that revealed itself during the past two 
years continues to describe one of the unexpected outcomes of 
our resilience efforts.  Unity became apparent as the voices of the 
community aligned with the direction of the mayor. In 2019, Mayor 
Fischer’s State of the City address raised the bar and reinforced 
Louisville’s resilience direction by mirroring the vision of Louisville as 
a resilient city built upon equity, compassion and trust. All agree that 
Louisville will grow as a city of compassion that drives our work. It is 
through compassion that we will create a city of equity. As a city of 
compassionate people, we will make life better for others by being 
good stewards of our outdoors and protect our environment.  

We recognize that our children and youth form the foundation of 
Louisville’s future. It is our responsibility to invest in our youths so that 
they have every opportunity to succeed, leading safe and healthy 
lives with supportive adults to guide them through the obstacles 
and providing a helping hand to overcome life’s hurdles. It is the 
community and leadership responsibilities to assure that all children 
and youth have the tools to focus on the future – a future flourishing  
from innovation. 
Trust: as we build the foundation for tomorrow, we need to 
be accountable to each other as residents and a government 
recognizing the importance of transparency. Our City Tomorrow 
Chapter describes visions, goals, and actions to prepare for the 
future representing the Mayor’s Strategic Plan, the Community Voices 
and the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. These are 
integrated together to create the platform for our future city. 

UNITY

TRUST

52

53

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TODAYOUR CITY TODAY04 "Louisville will become a more Resilient city as 

Our City 
Tomorrow  

we learn how we are interconnected as an entire 
community."
—Eric Friedlander

54

55

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWLouisville is 
committed to be 
a resilient city 
by creating a 
culture of equity, 
compassion, and 
trust.

Our City 
Tomorrow 

Louisville seeks to build resilience by creating a culture of equity, 
compassion, and trust (R=E+C+T).  We will do that by addressing 
structures and systems that prevent residents from achieving their 
full human potential and threading equity, compassion, and trust 
through the following goals and actions.  Built upon community 
feedback, Louisville will be a city where every resident has 
opportunities to thrive. Every vision, goal and action contained in 
this Louisville Resilience Strategy document must lead to greater 
community, equity, compassion and trust.

This document links the community voice to the Mayor’s Strategic 
Plan for Louisville’s growth and prosperity. Furthermore, each vision 
is linked to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. 
Threaded throughout the Louisville Resilience visions – Embrace 
Lifelong Learning, Ensure a Safe + Healthy City, 
Build a Vibrant Economy + Place, and Innovate in 
Civic Engagement – are symbols that represent the United 
Nations Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN).  The 
SDSN, working with a team of experts, developed and began 
implementing 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) as practical 
solutions to address global issues, reaching across six continents. 
 
In writing our community’s vision, goals, and actions it became 
apparent that we were linking the Resilience Strategy Document, 
the Mayor’s Strategic Plan and the SDSN into one cohesive, forward-
thinking direction.  The significance of this is evident. Our local 
efforts to build a resilient city is mirrored in a hierarchy of visions 
– international, local government, and community voice – that 
blended into one. This chapter demonstrates the three coming 
together.      

SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT 
GOALS

1 – No Poverty   
2 – Zero Hunger  
3 – Good Health and Well-Being
4 – Quality Education
5 – Gender Equality
6 – Clean Water and Sanitation
7 – Affordable and Clean Energy
8 – Decent Work and Economic Growth
9 – Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure
10 – Reduced Inequalities
11 – Sustainable Cities and Communities
12 – Responsible Consumption and 
Production
13 – Climate Action
14 – Life Below Water
15 – Life on Land
16 – Peace. Justice and Strong 
Institutions
17 – Partnerships for the Goals  

56

57

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROW01

Embrace 

Lifelong Learning

02

Ensure a Safe + 
Healthy City

03

Build a Vibrant 
Economy + Place

04   visions    
10   goals    
46   actions 

04

This chapter is divided into four visions that each have a set of goals 
and a series of actions representing the culmination of listening to 
what is important to our community, aligning to existing plans and 
actions.  We learned that Louisville is already hard at work to ensure 
a resilient city built upon equity, compassion and trust and that our 
residents recognize and value its importance. In the Appendices, 
there is a chart of sample plans and programs that link to actions as 
well as a list of acronyms.     

Resilience = 

Equity + Compassion + Trust   

Maximize Innovation + 

Civic Engagement

engage.

58

59

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWRoadmap to this chapter

01

02

03

04

GOAL 1.1
Ensure Equitable 
Education Attainment 
for All Residents 

Too often children enter school on an unleveled playing field. These 
children have experienced less opportunity to prepare for school 
and are not ready to enter kindergarten equally with other children 
of the same age. Such lack of equal opportunity creates an inequity 
of educational fairness. Education relates to a person’s quality of 
life predicting employment opportunities, financial stability, and 
overall well-being.  In Louisville, the neighborhoods with the lowest 
incomes also have the greatest number of residents without high 
school diplomas and the highest unemployment rates. These 
neighborhoods have a high percentage of children receiving free 
and reduced lunches. 

SPOTLIGHT
FAMILY SCHOLAR HOUSE 

Family Scholar House helps single 
mothers find stability and teaches them 
life skills. Jasmine Wilkins, one of the 
FHS participants, is with her daughter 
Brooklyn. 

Educational disparities have multidimensional ramifications, affecting parents’ earning potential, job stability 
and ability to support their children’s education. Furthermore, families in poverty are more likely to live in 
areas with poor air quality, leading to heightened rates of asthma and missed school days for students. When 
examining who is college and career-ready, only 52% of children who are eligible for free and reduced-price 
lunch are ready compared to 77% of the children who are not eligible for free and reduced-price lunch1. In 
fact, only 43% of children qualifying for lunch assistance are kindergarten ready compared to 71% of the 
children who do not qualify.    

2007

2016
14%

32%

14% 13%

17%

24%

22%

13%

19%

32%

Did not graduate high school

Did not go to college

Attended college

Persisted past first year

Graduated college

Data source: "From Data to Action: 15 Years Beyond Merger", 2018, by The Greater Louisville Project

66

RESILIENT LOUISVILLE

RESILIENT LOUISVILLE

67

1 

Greater Louisville Project, Poverty Beyond Income

engage

$

TIME-FRAME
0-1 Year

FUNDING
Partially Funded

OWNERS
Metro United Way 

RELATED PLANS
Not Applicable 

ACTION 4.2.1
Fully develop and 
implement United 
Community platform to 
enhance navigation of 
services.

Key Next Steps
•  Coordinate partner and license utilization.  
•  Develop referral capacity by service category and referral 

response time.  

•  Establish goal for network growth.  
•  Formalize network standard for referral response time. 

Background
United Community is an effort to implement a shared, technology-
based platform that will create a coordinated, community-wide 
system linking information and referrals between the health, 
education and social service sectors to more effectively meet 
the needs of children, individuals and families. It will provide the 
infrastructure that enables schools, doctor’s offices, hospitals, 
foodbanks, social service providers, and more to share data 
through individual consent and create seamless referrals among 
organizations to meet every type of care need. With the United 
Community shared data platform: 
 

1.  Residents are assessed for needs, no matter their entry 

point, and are connected to wraparound supports to help 
them overcome barriers.  

2.  Teachers, caseworkers, and physicians can share vital 

information about individuals’ needs, enhancing their ability 
to coordinate care. 

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  A seamless, institutionalized 

network that connects 
residents to services through a 
shared platform that provides 
shared data.

•  All residents have their basic 

needs met when seeking 
services.   

3.  Providers can track and monitor referrals and follow-up to 

ensure residents are getting connected to the resources 
they need. 

4.  Community leaders gain visibility into the number and types 

of services most needed and where gaps are in available 
resources.                                                                                                                           

Why is it important?
Coordinating the care and support of the most vulnerable members 
of our community is extraordinarily difficult. The existing systems 
that provide the needed supports are fractured and disconnected, 
resulting in fragmented service delivery and persistent poor 
outcomes. Currently, there is no way to seamlessly connect 
individuals to every type of service they need, and people slip 
through the cracks between referrals. The lack of coordination 
between health, social service, and education sectors also places 
additional burden on consumers’ access to services.  

PARTNERS
Jewish Heritage Fund for Excellence, James Graham Brown 
Foundation, Metro United Way, Community Foundation 
of Louisville, Louisville Metro Public Health Department, 
Louisville Gas & Electric Company, Kindred Healthcare                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                 

176

RESILIENT LOUISVILLE

RESILIENT LOUISVILLE

177

4 

visions

10 

goals

46 

actions

60

Vision name 

Vision description
and overview 

Sustainability 
Development 
Goals addressed 
by the vision 

Goal name

Goal description

Existing effort 
spotlight related 
to the goal 

Action name 

Key next steps 
and background

Time-frame
Funding 
Owners
Related Plans

live

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

OWNERS
Transit Authority of 
River City (TARC), 
Louisville Forward/
Develop Louisville

RELATED PLANS
Move Louisville, 
TARC Comprehensive 
Operations Analysis 
and Long-Range 
Plan, Kentuckiana 
Regional Planning and 
Development Agency 
(KIPDA) Regional 
Transportation Plan, 
Bike Louisville, 
Louisville Loop Maser 
Plan, Complete 
Streets, LouVelo, 
Cyclouvia. 

ACTION 2.3.2
Improve and maintain 
a stable, multimodal 
transportation system 
that effectively integrates 
all modes of mobility, 
from walking, biking, and 
transit, to driving to ensure 
availability, accessibility and 
affordability

Key Next Steps
•  Build an efficient system supported by sustainable sources 
of funding to ensure that the community can respond to any 
potential shocks and stresses. 
Invest in transit and non-single occupancy vehicles.  

• 
•  Strengthen transit system with balanced approach between 

service area coverage and increased frequency on major transit 
corridors. 
Increase bike and pedestrian infrastructure and employ more 
compact zoning.  

• 

•  Extend public transit hours of service (early and late) in 

response to various community needs: access to jobs and 
education, economic development and employment needs at 
the local and regional level.      

Background
Move Louisville, the city’s strategic multi-modal transportation 
plan, identifies key policies and projects for implementation 
through 2040 and seeks to reduce vehicle miles traveled (VMT).  
Reducing VMT will help improve air quality and reduce costly 

Goals and actions under 
that vision at a glance

Data-driven information 
about this goal

Potential key 
indicators

road infrastructure investments in the future.  The Transit Authority 
of River City (TARC) has provided public transportation services 
for almost 45 years to Louisville Metro/Jefferson County and 
incorporated surrounding counties: Bullitt and Oldham Counties in 
Kentucky, and Clark and Floyd Counties in Southern Indiana.  The 
Louisville region highly values the public transportation system but 
recognizes that the community is growing and will need a stronger, 
expanded multimodal transit system to support future economic 
and population growth.    Our intention is to develop a public transit 
network that is available, accessible, affordable – one that is easy to 
use for all residents across the community and the region.  Providing 
multi-modal options helps support a healthy, connected and 
sustainable city for the future.

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
• 

Increased availability and 
accessibility of public 
transportation to area 
residents.
Increased access to jobs 
systemwide.

• 

•  Decreased single-occupancy 

vehicle use to 75% and 
increased ridership to 6% by 
2035.

•  Reduced daily VMT by 500,000 

to 19.4 DVMT.
Improved safety causing 30% 
less roadway fatalities and 
serious injuries by 2035.

82%  Drive Alone
9% 
Carpool
4% 
Other Means
3%  
Transit
2%   Walk

• 

Existing modal split for How 
Louisville Gets Around Today – 
data from Move Louisville, 2016

Why is it important?
Louisville’s transportation system is heavily dependent on 
automobiles and most Louisvillians travel via single occupancy 
vehicle (SOV).  Public transportation is an essential part of the 
entire Louisville Metro infrastructure network and a critical link that 
supports resilience and community ability to respond to current and 
future mobility needs of residents.   In FY 2018, TARC served more 
than 12.5 million riders and moved more than 42,000 people on an 
average weekday.       

PARTNERS
KIPDA, Louisville Metro Government, Louisville Metro Public 
Works & Assets, Metro Parks, Kentucky Department of 
Transportation, Center for Accessible Living, Bicycling for Louisville.                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                

Photo from ridetarc.org

Partners 

112

RESILIENT LOUISVILLE

RESILIENT LOUISVILLE

113

61

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROW6465RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEEducation is a continuous process that occurs throughout the lifespan allowing persons to reach their full human potential.  Through lifelong learning every resident is equipped for college, career and a successful, productive life.  We focus on the whole child’s development - mental, physical, and social and assure that children are ready for school and families have their basic needs met and the resources to prosper.  Adults in a child’s life understand the impact of trauma on children and families and help the child navigate to a level of resilience that supports ongoing personal growth.  Together we will open the doors to opportunities that enrich learning and continuously provide children with possibilities leading to a successful life.  Louisville is positioned to secure a strong, talented workforce leading to greater opportunities for our city.“In education, the term equity refers to the principle of fairness.  While it is often used interchangeably with the related principle of equality, equity encompasses a wide variety of educational models, programs, and strategies that may be considered fair, but not necessarily equal.  It has been said that ‘equity is the process; equality is the outcome,’ given that equity – what is fair and just – may not in the process of education reflect strict equality – what is applied, allocated, or distributed equally.”    - The Glossary of Education Reform.Embrace Lifelong LearningSustainable Development Goals1.2 Attract, Retain and Develop Talent for the Workforce of the Future1.1 Ensure EquitableEducation Attainmentfor All Residents Build the infrastructure for Evolve502: Louisville’s Promise from Cradle to Career and begin the implementation of wrap around supports and a promise scholarship.Improve the quality of learning experiences for children, youth and young adults during the summer and out-of-school time. Ensure that students entering kindergarten are school-ready.Develop partnerships with the business community to provide youth with mentorship and real-job experience that leads to developed skill sets and employment opportunities. Develop partnerships with the business community to provide youth with mentorship and real-job experience that leads to developed skill sets and employment opportunities. 05 Actions 1.1.11.1.21.1.31.2.11.2.2UPDATE AT THE END8283RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLELouisville residents have the right to live in a safe and healthy city that assures mobility and an environment built upon a strong infrastructure.  To be a healthy city, we address the needs of vulnerable populations and tackle issues such as fair, quality housing and equitable food systems. Louisville is a city that addresses violence and substance misuse, a city that supports individuals who have been victimized, provides opportunities for re-entering citizens to be productive, and seeks alternatives to incarceration for non-violent offenders.  Building a safe and healthy city is a process, not an outcome (World Health Organization).  And while researchers agree that “a city is a human construct” it often is built and organized upon ineffective, historical policies that create unfairness leading to a host of inequities.  A safe and healthy city is a clean, safe environment that allows residents to provide direction and provides access to a variety of opportunities and resources.  Ensure a Safe + Healthy CitySustainable Development GoalsAt A Glance3 Goals2.2 Implement Trauma- informed Violence Reduction Strategies2.3 Strengthen Built and Natural Infrastructure to Promote Health and Well-being  2.1 Address the Needs of Louisville's Most Vulnerable Populations 18 Actions Work with stakeholders to build a movement for health equity.Advocate for policies that support trauma-informed services to children, families and communities.Advocate for policies that support trauma-informed services to children, families and communities.Develop and preserve new and/or rehabilitated quality affordable housing.Promote the development of a more robust and equitable food system focused on waste reduction, donation and composting. Tackle mental health issues that may lead to homelessness, crime, and addiction. Develop and adopt an environmental justice policy for the city, outlining and instructing decision-makers on how to better engage and protect environmentally at-risk communities.Respond to the substance use epidemic through prevention, harm reduction, treatment, and recovery. Create a safe platform for individuals who have experienced trauma to share their stories.Support programs that offer case management to non-violent offenders to avoid jail time. Promote civic engagement and collaboration, leading to community actions. Prioritize areas with low tree canopy.Improve and maintain a stable, multimodal transportation system that effectively integrates all modes of mobility, from walking, biking, and transit, to driving to ensure availability, accessibility and affordability. Increase renewable energy at multiple scales. Expand green infrastructure and spaces: Parkland and open spaces.Expand green infrastructure and spaces: Metro Sewer District (MSD) Green Infrastructure Program.Expand green infrastructure and spaces: Mill Creek Greenway.Implement Strategies to Mitigate Climate Change Impacts.2.1.12.1.22.1.32.1.42.1.52.1.62.1.72.1.82.2.12.2.22.2.32.3.12.3.22.3.32.3.42.3.52.3.62.3.7126127RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEWe recognize that a vibrant economy builds community wealth through equitable employment opportunities for all residents who are to be paid a fair-living wage. By intentional economic development, employment possibilities will reach from manufacturing to service to entrepreneurship, capitalizing on our food, beverage and healthcare industries.  We provide opportunities for residents to develop skill sets that promote workplace mobility.  Residents will experience a breadth of cultural opportunities by experiencing the beauty of a vibrant park system and a diverse expression of the arts.Build a Vibrant Economy + Place Sustainable Development Goals3.2 Increase Individual Financial Stability and Opportunity for Economic Mobility3 Goals3.3 Build Upon Louisville's Cultural Assets 3.1 Ensure Inclusive and Equitable Economic Growth in Historically Marginalized CommunitiesAt A Glance13 Actions Develop and implement strategies and policies to increase investment without displacement in neighborhoods impacted y historic discriminatory practices. Identify and remove barriers to racial equity in procurement and contracting processes. Advance racial equity by implementing strategies for an equitable workforce. Create a Louisville Mobility Lab by analyzing the barriers to economic mobility and fostering economic stability among population groups leading to equitable living conditions. Improve median annual wages adjusted for cost of living. Standardize financial literacy programing for youth. Increase opportunities for entrepreneurship.Explore the development of an array of services and support that will foster the establishment and growth of cooperative ownership structures and launch at least three such services to support the development of cooperative ownership structures within the first five years of work. Develop and implement a plan to grow talent in the next four years by creating a cohesive integrated and strategic tech ecosystem.Improve equitable access to outdoors for Louisville youth and families.Plan, design, and build the Louisville Loop.Increase citizen engagement and participation in the use of parks. Maintain Louisville's status as a "Welcoming City", align community resources to integrate and empower our foreign-born community and continue to grow our foreign-born population. 3.1.13.1.23.1.33.2.13.2.23.2.33.2.43.2.53.2.63.3.13.3.23.3.33.3.4162163RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLELouisville’s global reputation for performance improvement and innovation allows us to adapt quickly to future challenges. We accomplish this through the use of data, technology, crowd-sourcing, smart city strategies and problem-solving to increase operational and fiscal performance and by engaging community stakeholders in our innovation work. Technology will provide the platform for us to form a system of communication allowing us to efficiently address the basic needs of individuals in crisis.  A system that promotes transparency builds integrity and trust.  Integrity and trust grow not only from transparency but also involvement.  It is getting involved to change social conditions so that all have equal opportunities.  By being social agents, residents support residents creating social cohesion so that all may prosper.Innovate in Civic EngagementSustainable Development Goals2 Goals4.2 Implement Shared Transparency & Accountability Measures with the Community4.1 Cultivate Social-change Agents and Foster Greater Community CohesionAt A GlanceAt A Glance08 Actions Engage every Louisville resident to help others through volunteerism and service opportunities. Fully develop and implement Lean into Louisville.Train the Louisville Metro Government employees and the community on implicit bias and its advancing racial equity. Establish the Louisville Equity Advisory Council to provide advice and guidance for Louisville's equity and resilience efforts. Establish the Mayor's Youth Advisory Council Build the capacity of residents and Louisville Metro Government to collaborate on decision-making processes that improve health and wellness. Fully develop and implement United Community platform to enhance navigation to services. Foster community trust by publishing and visualizing open data. 4.1.14.1.24.1.34.1.44.1.54.1.64.2.14.2.28485RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEThe Louisville Metro Center for Health Equity examined 11 root causes that lead to health outcomes.  These root causes are correlated to quality of life and impact across the life span.  The root causes are grounded in food systems that provide accessible and nutritious food; environmental quality; affordable and efficient housing; safe and accessible transportation; affordable healthcare; green and open spaces; opportunities for engagement with the arts, music and culture; complete and livable communities; criminal justice; and employment that provides a living wage1. Quality of life influences health outcomes and in Louisville, there is a 12.6 years difference in life expectancy in relationship to a person’s quality of life impacted by the root causes.     1 Health in All Policies, A Guide for State and Local Governments, 2013GOAL 2.1Address the Needs of Louisville’s Most Vulnerable PopulationsSPOTLIGHTMEALS ON WHEELSVolunteers of Meals on Wheels deliver hot lunches to around 70 homebound seniors every weekday.  Data source: "Louisville Metro Health Equity Report", 2017, by the Center for Health EquityRecommendations from Louisville Metro Health Equity Report Root causes shape the choices that are available to residents and communities.  And we know that root causes look different for different communities.  Thousands of research studies validate that social, political, physical and economic environments impact residents’ health and overall well-being.  Evidence tells us that when we come together to align resources and improve policies and practices, we see improvements in residents’ health outcome and quality of life1.  1 Louisville Metro Health Equity Report, 2017Interventions must happen at multiple levels - individual, interpersonal, organizational, community and policy- to have the biggest impact on health.Ensure more opportunities for wealth-building, education, and employment in our community for those that needit most. Expand access to healthy foods by examining our policies and practices for areas of innovation. Continue to examine our criminal justice system for opportunities for improvement and changes that willsupport the creation of a thriving community.Support our youngest community members by preventing or mitigating the effects of trauma and adverse childhood experiences.Create opportunities for all communities to thrive with access to parks, businesses, and community organizations.Promote policies and development that protect and improve our environmental quality. Build our health infrastructure to ensure that all persons are able to easily receive preventative medical services as well astreatment for mental health, trauma and substance use disorder. Increase and improve systems for data collection, data sharing and data analysis across all outcomes. As LouisvilleMetro we need to examine where data is missing, and for what groups the data does not exist. When possible,break data down by various groups to get a better picture of who is most impacted.136788452128129RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEHistorical policies such as Jim Crow continue to influence economic growth in today’s marginalized communities.  In fact, today the United States again faces divergence of population after moving toward convergence over several decades. The factors measured include median household income, poverty, unemployment rates, and life expectancy – demonstrating a large gap between succeeding and struggling communities. (During recent studies, it was determined that the distressed communities that did show upward mobility oftentimes revealed a growth of populations returning to the city reflecting gentrification.)   Researchers also state that counties with high rates of African American populations tend to experience less economic mobility and that children living in lower income households tend to remain in lower income clusters creating areas of inequity across the generations.  Economists have weighed the impact of placed-based policies in contrast to individual-based policies noting how place-based policies such as housing and an “unequal education” system have created barriers to equality.  “Racial inequality exacerbates place-based problems and impedes the effectiveness of policies designed to ameliorate them"1.   1 www.hamiltonproject.org/papers/place_based_policies_for-shared_econom-ic_growthGOAL 3.1Ensure Inclusive and Equitable Economic Growth in Historically Marginalized CommunitiesSPOTLIGHTCHEF SPACELocated in the historic Russell neighborhood, Chef Space is Louisville’s first kitchen incubator where food entrepreneurs can craft and sell their fine food creations.West Louisville is experiencing an infusion of nearly $1 Billion of investment competed, announced, or underway since 2014.  These investments help meet the needs of residents and families, increase safety and improve neighborhood amenities.  It provides an attractive place to do business.  Louisville Metro Government is committed to the coordinated investments, resources and strategies that will be a part of ongoing sustainable efforts to revitalize west Louisville.11 West Louisville Strategies for SuccessRedlining is the denial of services or the refusal to grant loans or insurance to certain neighborhoods based on racial and socioeconomic discrimination. This map was created through independent research by Joshua Poe, a local urban planner.   164165RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEThe 2013 Social Change Impact Report identifies the profile of persons who are social-change agents based upon  survey results that shaped six classifications:  1. Ultra-committed Change-Maker (13% of US respondents);  2. Faith-Inspired Giver (17% US);  3. Socially Conscious Consumer (11% US);  4. Purposeful Participant (18% US);  5. Casual Contributor (14% US) and 6. Social Change Spectator (15% US). The remaining 12% US respondents reported not engaging in social change.  In the United States, 95% of Faith-Inspired Givers and 83% of Social Change Agents overall respondents stated that it is very or somewhat important to them personally to be involved in positive social change. (www.WALDENU/IMPACTREPORT)    Social change agent reflects volunteerism, social issue education, working together, and empowering residents – all intended to build social cohesion that improves the lives of individuals, neighborhoods and community by creating an environment of trust where residents can build a better future.       GOAL 4.1Cultivate Social-change Agents and Foster Greater Community Cohesion SPOTLIGHTMAYOR'S GIVE A DAYThe Mayor’s Give A Day Week of Service is an annual showcase and celebration of compassion and service in all areas of the Louisville community.  The entire city engages in volunteerism where individuals, businesses and government work together to improve the lives of our residents, build a sense of community and social cohesion.  Give a Day: Mayor's Week of Service, Metro United WayLouisville's Social Change Agents: Give a Day Week 2019Pursuing his pledge to make Louisville a more caring city, Mayor Greg Fischer signed a resolution committing to a multi-year Compassionate Louisville campaign on November 11, 2011.  The Compassionate Louisville Values include hospitality, abundance, awareness and understanding, intention, compassion, beauty, inclusion, transparency, and is universally positive.  Exhibiting these values, the Mayor’s Give a Day of Service began with a “one day call to serve others” and has evolved to a week of service moving from 80 volunteers in 2011 to a cadre of over 200,000 volunteers in 2019.  acts of volunteerism and compassion during one week of service235,000+total volunteer hours given to projects327,699pounds of food donated through Kroger and Dare to Care food drives38,000Brightside volunteers cleaned up neighbourhoods and parks in Louisville17,456thank you notes written by Global Game Changers4,400raised by Lucy Lu Bakes' online bake sale with proceeds going to Scarlet's Bakery$800units of blood donated at Red Cross blood drives198beds built for JCPS students1587475RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEA basic tenet of Evolve 502: Louisville’s Promise from Cradle to Career is workforce readiness.  Lifelong learners are prepared to move forward with new career opportunities attracting economic development.  With the growth of technology, employers commit to persons who have attained skill sets to master new technology.  Learning pathways connect students to meaningful work and assure employees are prepared to evolve with a changing world.GOAL 1.2Attract, Retain and Develop Talent for the Workforce of the Future SPOTLIGHTSUMMERWORKS In 2018, the SummerWorks Program placed more than 6,200 young people ages 16-21 to work in hospitals, restaurants, museums, banks and hotels. 10%20%40%30%50%60%70%80%Bachelor's Degrees or HigherGeographyYoung Adult Bachelor's Degrees or HigherA skilled and educated populace is the foundation of any thriving city. Educated cities not only attract more 21st-century jobs that alleviate poverty and boost prosperity but are also able to reinvent themselves even after negative events, such as an economic downturn. Providing access to education is one of the the most promising ways we can build and sustain a greater Louisville.Since 2010, Louisville’s goal has been for 40% of working adults to hold bachelor’s degrees. Data show that that goal has not been reached and significant gaps exist both between White and Black residents and across geographies, but the percentage of Louisvillians with degrees is growing at a faster pace than most of our peers. Since 2000, Louisville’s ranking in working adult bachelor's degree attainment has increased from 14th to 11th among 17 peer cities.This graph compares Louisville to the cities that have improved the most and the least within our peer group since 2000. From 2000 to 2017, the percentage of adults with a bachelor’s degree or higher increased in Louisville nearly as quickly as Grand Rapids, the most improved peer city. Despite this strong progress, Louisville remains below the peer city mean due to its history as a relatively undereducated city.DEGREE AND CERTIFICATE GROWTHMAIN METRIC:Current: 35%Goal: 40%EDUCATIONRanked11thSource: American CommunitySurvey Table B15001Source: American Community Survey ables P148, B15002Source: American Community Survey Tables PCT025, B15001Source: American Community Survey Table B1500149%44%43%40%40%39%39%39%37%35%35%35%34%33%33%32%32%CharlotteSt. LouisNashvilleColumbusOmahaKnoxvilleCincinnatiGrand RapidsGreensboroGreenvilleLouisvilleBirminghamOklahoma CityIndianapolisMemphisKansas CityTulsaBachelor's Degrees or HigherSource: American Community Survey Table B15001••••Over the past 15 years, the number of young adults with bachelor’s degrees in Louisville has increased. However, the city is still below the peer mean, and the growth in the percentage of young adults with bachelor’s degrees has stagnated in recent years.30%35%40%45%Louisville75th PercentilePeer City Mean25th PercentilePeerGrowthAges 25 to 343-year rolling average30.7%38.2%2000200620082010201220142016200020062008201020122014201620%10%30%40%50%50%White LouisvilleWhite Peer MeanBlack LouisvilleBlack Peer Mean25th and 75thPercentiles•••••RaceAges 25 to 643-year rolling average18.3%27.2%11.9%36.6%Louisville ranks 11th among its peer cities for the number young adults (ages 25-34) with a bachelor’s degree or higher. This places the city below the peer city mean and in the bottom cluster of our peer group, with only 38.1% of young adult residents holding a bachelor’s degree or higher. ••••LouisvilleHighest growth: Grand RapidsLowest growth: TulsaPeer MeanPeer GrowthAges 25 to 643-year rolling average200020062008201020122014201620%10%30%40%Education Pipeline changes 2007 to 2016Attended collegeDid not graduate high schoolDid not go to collegePersisted past first yearGraduated college13%14%19%22%32%24%13%17%14%32%2016200727.4%34.7%34Source: American Community Survey Table B1500154%52%47%46%44%43%43%43%41%41%38%37%36%35%35%33%30%NashvilleCharlotteSt. LouisColumbusGrand RapidsOmahaCincinnatiKnoxvilleBirminghamIndianapolisLouisvilleGreenvilleOklahoma CityKansas CityGreensboroMemphisTulsaRanked11thLifelong Learning and Talent AttractionCertificates have increasingly become a meansof accessing higher-wage jobs.Louisville currently ranks among the top of its peer cities in measures of certificate holders. 2017 data reveal that 23% of Louisville residents held a certificate, 50% held a certificate or a higher degree, and 4% held only a certificate. Additionally, we rank 4th among our peers for associate degree attainment for young adults.Source: GLP analysis of Current Population Survey MicrodataNetMigrationBachelor’s Degree or Higher3-year rolling averageSource: American Community Survey Table B07009, B07409••••Louisville75th PercentilePeer City Mean25th Percentile200820102012201420161,800-600Source: American Community Survey Table B150012000200620082010201220142016While Louisville is advancing from the 25th percentile to the peer city mean, it continues to fall below the peer mean for the percentage of adults with an associate degree.36%40%44%48%••••Louisville75th PercentilePeer City Mean25th PercentileAssociate Degreesor HigherAges 25 to 643-year rolling average34%43.3%-10000100020003000Louisville ranks 5th in our peer group for homeownership. Around 61% of residents own their home. White residents are more likely than Black residents to own their homes. More Black residents than White residents are living in burdened homes, owned and rented.Cost-burdened households pay more than 30% of their income toward rent. Louisville has the fourth-lowest rate of burdened households among its peers thanks to a relatively low cost of living. However, West End residents are far more likely tolive in burdened households than residents of other parts of the city.The Arts Vibrancy Index combines several indices of arts providers and arts dollars in a community. Louisville is near the peer mean on the Arts Vibrancy Index. The data is heavily skewed by Nashville's large music industry, and it should be noted that Louisville outperforms most peer cities. Louisville's biggest strength relative to its peers is its number of nonprofit arts and culture organizations, and it's largest weakness is the total revenue generated by the arts sector. The Arts Vibrancy Index is adapted from SMU's DataArts program.QUALITY OF PLACEHousing1020403050607080Minutes (one-way)West End residents are twice as likely as residents of the rest of the city to have a daily commute of over two hours.Homeownership Source: American Community Survey Table B2500369%67%64%62%61%61%61%59%59%59%58%58%57%55%54%53%53%Grand RapidsGreenvilleKnoxvilleSt. LouisLouisvilleBirminghamOmahaOklahoma CityTulsaGreensboroKansas CityCincinnatiCharlotteMemphisIndianapolisColumbusNashvilleRanked5thHomeownership, Affordability and Race0%10%20%30%40%50%60%Cost-burdened homeowners13%9%Rent affordablehomes15%29%Cost-burdenedrenters15%38%Rent affordablehousing57%24%White LouisvilleBlack Louisville••Cost-Burdened HouseholdsSource: GLP analysis of ACS microdata from IPUMS-USA26%27%27%27%30%30%30%30%31%31%31%31%31%32%33%35%35%Grand RapidsGreenvilleKnoxvilleLouisvilleCincinnatiOmahaTulsaOklahoma CityKansas CitySt. LouisCharlotteBirminghamColumbusGreensboroNashvilleIndianapolisMemphisRanked4thCommuteTimesHouseholds in PovertySource: American Community Survey Table B170179%10%11%12%13%13%13%14%14%14%14%14%15%15%16%16%18%Grand RapidsCharlotteOmahaGreenvilleSt. LouisKansas CityKnoxvilleGreensboroNashvilleLouisvilleTulsaColumbusOklahoma CityCincinnatiIndianapolisBirminghamMemphisRanked10thThe percentage of households in poverty has decreased from a high of 17% following the Great Recession to 14% in 2017. Louisville's poverty rate is currently at the peer mean.109Livability & Talent AttractionSource: American Community Survey Table B08303-25% – -10%-10% – 0%0% – 10%10% – 25%25% – 50%50% – 80%Population Change (%)Population Change: 2000 - 2017Since 2000, the highest population growth in Louisville has been seen in the eastern part of the county. Most neighborhoods in the West End have seen very slight declines in population. The Portland and California-Parkland neighborhoods lost 17% and 16% of their residents, respectively.Net MigrationSince 2008, the number of people moving out of Louisville has grown larger than the number of people moving into the city. This trend is more pronounced among young adults and residents with bachelor's or graduate degrees.20082010201220142016••••Louisville75th PercentilePeer City Mean25th PercentileNetMigration3-year rolling average10,300Metropolitan Population in the Core CountySource: GLP Analysis of American Community Survey Tables P001, B01003Source: American Community Survey Tables B07001, B07401Since Merger, Louisville has not experienced population loss from the urban core inside the Watterson. However, some neighborhoods have shrunk while others have grown significantly. In general, neighborhoods toward the east of the city have seen the highest population growth. The Louisville population has grown steadily since 2000. Approximately 60% of residents in the broader metropolitan area live in Jefferson County, and Louisville ranks 7th among peer cities in this measure of urban density. The percentage of residents living in the core county has remained largely unchanged since 2000.10%20%40%30%50%60%BurdenedHouseholdsCost-Burdened HouseholdsSource: American Community Survey Table S2503Source: GLP analysis of ACS microdata from IPUMS-USARanked8thSource: GLP Analysis of US Census Bureau County Business Pattern and IRS Business Master File dataNashvilleCincinnatiKansas CitySt. LouisOklahoma CityOmahaIndianapolisLouisvilleKnoxvilleCharlotteTulsaBirminghamGrand RapidsColumbusMemphisGreenvilleGreensboroArts Vibrancy IndexMAIN METRIC:-6k-3k03k6k9k12k15k -4,200Data source: "From Data to Action: 15 Years Beyond Merger", 2018, by The Greater Louisville Project“Within our schools, we are experiencing huge achievement gaps between white and black students, high suspension rates for minorities and health inequities.  Education is the most critical pathway to financial independence, health and well-being and serves as a great equalize for success and personal achievement.”  – Marland Cole, Evolve502102103RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEViolence falls within many categories affecting all ages, races, socioeconomic status, ethnicity, sexual orientation and genders - domestic violence, workplace violence, dating violence, bullying, community violence, child abuse – for example; and the residue from trauma often impacts lives creating mental and physical harm www.samhsa.gov/trauma-violence).  Community violence frequently is unpredictable creating a heightened vigilance, building anxiety, and shaping the perception of an unsafe world (www.nctsn.org/what-is-child-trauma/trauma/trauma-types/community-violence).  Trauma can erect obstacles that impedes emotional development blocking children and adults’ abilities to thrive (www.ncbi.nlm.nif.gov/books/NBK207191/).     In Louisville agencies and individuals work to stem the prevalence of violence and its negative impact on victims through programming, case management, education, and resources.  Louisville services are extended to the offender by providing restorative justice to non-violent offenders and assisting with re-entry after incarceration.  Many work upstream to address the root causes of trauma while other programs offer trauma-informed interventions such as the Cure Violence model that interrupts potentially violent conflicts and works with high-risk individuals.  A key component of the model is to mobilize the community to change norms. (http://cureviolence.org/the-model/essential-elements/)     GOAL 2.2Implement Trauma-informed Violence Reduction StrategiesSPOTLIGHTSCARLET'S BAKERYScarlet’s Bakery teaches life skills, baking skills, and overall work readiness to women as they transition toward building more sustainable, healthy futures for themselves after experiences years of abuse and exploitation.Credit: Scarlet's BakeryData source: "Louisville Violence Reduction Strategy"Louisville works to create pathways away from violence through training, support and educational assistance.  We identify and alleviate many of the root causes of violence including economic and educational challenges as well as historic, systemic barriers to success for people in the neighborhoods with the most violent crime.  “Just as there is no one reason for violence, there is no one solution for alleviating it. Together, we’re investing in our youth, supporting young people who are trying to change their lives. That, in turn, helps all of us build a safe, more vibrant community,” Rashaad Abdur-Rahman, Director of the Office for Safe and Healthy Neighborhoods. EnforcementLouisville Violence Reduction StrategyPlacing laser focus of law enforcement efforts on the small per-centage of people who commit gun violence while ensuring the safety and security of our citizens.A coordinated approach to intervening at the first sign of po-tential violence in the streets, schools, and hospitals to reduce violence and to produce a more positive outcome. Reaching individuals, families, and communities before vio-lence happens so that violence is less likely to occur.Pulling together youth, neighborhood residents, community organizations, and law enforcement to ensure a culture where gun violence is not tolarated.Trasnforming policies, practices, and systems to reduce gun violence. Assisting those who have committed crimes come back into the community by providing resources and opportunities to prevent recidivism and re-build community. 123456InterventionPreventionOrganizational Change andDevelopmentRe-EntryCommunity Mobilization136137RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEEconomic mobility is the ability to improve an individual’s or family’s economic status and usually is measured by income.  Key findings from The Pew Center on the Economic Mobility of the States study found that Kentucky is one of nine southern states that consistently experiences less upward mobility and greater downward mobility compared to the nation. The average hourly wage in Louisville (May 2017) was $21.68 which is approximately 11% below the national average and Louisville’s minimum wage is $9 higher than the state rate of $7.25.  Researchers correlate education with economic mobility and find education as the key to eliminating disparities.  One key finding is that ‘increases in parent education lead to better educational outcomes of children, especially reducing the probability of very low achievement [and that] job training for adults appears to have effects that may enhance both absolute and relative mobility within and across the generations,” (Pew Charitable Trust, Economic Mobility Project).    GOAL 3.2Increase individual financial stability and opportunity for economic mobilitySPOTLIGHTLOUISVILLE URBAN LEAGUE EXPUNGEMENT Criminal records prevent hundreds of thousands of Kentuckians from fully re-entering the community and rebuild their lives.  With the help of a $300,000 donation, the Louisville Urban League is working with locals to expunge their records.Data source: "From Data to Action: 15 Years Beyond Merger", 2018, by The Greater Louisville ProjectA living wage is the amount of income for a household to live above poverty and determines the quality of an individual’s life. While often thought of as minimum wage, the living wage takes into consideration the actual cost of living.  A living wage should cover the expense of leading a healthy life including payment for shelter, medical costs, food and transportation.  These costs vary according to where someone lives indicating that the amount of a living wage varies region to region.1  1 Living Wage and How it Compares to the Minimum Wage https://www.thebalance.com/living-wage-3305771Based on the MIT Living Wage Calculator, two thirds of working households in Louisville earned a living wage in 2016 that was enough to cover a basic level of living expenses such as food, childcare, healthcare, transportation, and taxes. The remaining thrid of households relied on government assitance; aid from nonprofits, firends, or family; or did not comfortably meet their basic needs. In a two-parent, two-child households, each parent would to earn $15.50 an hour working full-time to comfortably meet their basic needs.Source: GPL analysis of American Community Survey Microdata and MIT Liing Wage Calculator data. In 2016, one third of working households in Louisville did not earn a living wage in 2016 that wsa enough to cover a basic level of living expenses. LIVING WAGEPERCENTAGE EARNING A LIVING WAGE$22.9k37.8k52.6k65.9k78.5k48.9k59.3k77.1k20%60%40%80%100%174175RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLETechnology is a source of communication and measurement that conveys transparency and accountability – building a sense of trust.  However, transparency is not enough leaving the retrieved information open for interpretation.   Residents need to understand the intent and purpose behind the data to accurately interpret the information.  Applied correctly, technology is a significant door to education and understanding.          GOAL 4.2Implement Shared Transparency & Accountability Measures with the CommunitySPOTLIGHTUNITED COMMUNITY United Community will provide the foundation for a connected community support system that improves the life outcomes of children, individuals and families across Louisville and the region by facilitating integrated, multidimensional supports for our most vulnerable.Data source: Open Data Initiative, Louisville Metro GovernmentIn October 2013, Mayor Fischer signed an executive order entitled, “An Executive Order Creating an Open Data Plan” directing Louisville Metro Government to review its data and make it more accessible to the public through an open data portal. Years prior, the Louisville/Jefferson County Information Consortium (LOJIC) – a multi-agency partnership – formed to build and maintain a Geographic Information System (GIS) that became the source of the mayor’s requested open data system1.  The system’s purpose is to provide transparency of government and improve public service.  It fosters entrepreneurship advancing the growth of the ‘digital economy’ allowing businesses to make quicker decisions on investments and enhancements in the community. The open data system proactively meets the demand for data. 1 https://www.lojic.org/abiyt/our-vision; https://www.lojc-gis-open-data-policyLouisville LOJIC Open Geospatial Data: Data CategoriesAddressingDemographicsElevationEnvironmentFloodingPlanningList All LOJIC DataAerial PhotographyPoliticalPublic SafetySocietyTransportation108109RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLE“Natural environments affect human health and well-being both directly and indirectly,” (Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Environmental Science).  Historical civilizations to today’s modern society recognize the need for the green environment and its relationship to health. Research documents the role nature plays in human health but even more, research indicates that a reduction in crime is linked to social cohesion and connecting to nature (Weinstein, et.al., 2015).   The role of the built infrastructure shapes necessities such as structure development, roadways, storage structure, management of drinking water, sewer and storm waste. In modern society the challenge is blending gray and green infrastructures in urban spaces and their importance to social interaction (http://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cate/vol5/issl/3).  Undoubtedly, the built and natural environment are linked and influence the “social and economic determinants of health.”     (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6064105/). GOAL 2.3Strengthen Built and Natural Infrastructure to Promote Health and Well-beingSPOTLIGHTTREES LOUISVILLETrees Louisville works to protect and expand Louisville’s urban forest through tree planting, public awareness, education and collaboration.  Data source: "Louisville Loop Master Plan", 2013, by Louisville Metro CouncilThe Louisville Loop celebrates the city’s history and natural world. The vision of the Louisville Loop is to develop an estimated 100-mile loop path system that becomes an essential component for the growth and prosperity of the region.  It will form a network of shared-use paths, soft surface trails, on road bike lanes, and stream corridors and connect the Olmsted Parkways, greenways and transit routes.  The intent of the loop is to leverage the impact of the original Olmsted Park and Parkway system and to help shape the future experience of Louisville.1 1 Louisville Loop Maser Plan.  Connecting People to a Greener Healthier Community.2972The Loop connects peopleThe Loop connects parksThe Loop connects services28598741.5K7210Kcity neighborhoodsparks within ½ mile of the Loopplaygrounds within a ½ mile of the Loop**in public parksor 42% schools are within 1 mile of the Loop. 11small cities around countyparks connected by the LoopOlmsted Parksof households in the county live within 1 mile of the Loopacres of parkland within ½ mileretail establishments within 1 mile of the Loop66of Louisville's Metro population live within 1 mile of the loop %%150151RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEThe definition of cultural asset is something that has value because of its contribution to a community's creativity, knowledge, traditions, culture, meaning, and vitality. They can be the places you visit to express your cultural identity, and/or the resources one uses to pursue a creative practice.  Louisville is a welcoming city that celebrates the different cultures that make-up its population.  Arts and culture are alive across the region, from downtown venues to neighborhood parks and libraries.  It is a city that resonates with the arts in the form of orchestra, ballet, opera, regional and children’s theatre as well as a breadth of museums – from art to history to sports.    Louisville’s arts and culture define its authenticity and recognizes that every child and every adult benefit from equitable accessibility.  GOAL 3.3Build Upon Louisville's Cultural Assets SPOTLIGHTTHE BIG TABLE The Big Table creates engaging spaces for the community to encounter one another and connect through meaningful conversation. From our annual giant potluck with over 1500 participants to smaller conversations around sensitive topics, we aim to help our community become more interconnected and develop our collective capacity to discuss important issues. “Arts and culture have the power to transform the region, to help advance a more competitive, economically stronger, more educated, creative and compassionate Greater Louisville. Arts and culture are alive across the region, from downtown venues to neighborhood parks, libraries, schools and community centers.”1   1 Imagine Greater Louisville 2020.  An arts and culture vision to transform the region.Data source: "Imagine Greater Louisville 2020: An Arts and Culture Vision to Transform the Region", 2017, by Imagine Greater Louisville 2020$326781,7004726 MillionMILLIONMUSEUMSCREATIVE BUSINESSES IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY GENERATED BY THE ARTS AND CULTURE SECTOR IN 2016ARTS AND CULTURE VENUES AND ESTABLISHMENTSESTIMATED ATTENDANCE ARTISTSLIVING AND WORKING IN OUR COMMUNITYAT ARTS AND CULTURE VENUES NEARLY EVERY STATE IN THE U.S. AND DOZENS OF COUNTRIESBOTH NONPROFIT AND FOR-PROFIT+PARTICIPATION FROM EVERY ZIP CODE IN THE REGION1,800459HISTORICALSITES  108109RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLE“Natural environments affect human health and well-being both directly and indirectly,” (Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Environmental Science).  Historical civilizations to today’s modern society recognize the need for the green environment and its relationship to health. Research documents the role nature plays in human health but even more, research indicates that a reduction in crime is linked to social cohesion and connecting to nature (Weinstein, et.al., 2015).   The role of the built infrastructure shapes necessities such as structure development, roadways, storage structure, management of drinking water, sewer and storm waste. In modern society the challenge is blending gray and green infrastructures in urban spaces and their importance to social interaction (http://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cate/vol5/issl/3).  Undoubtedly, the built and natural environment are linked and influence the “social and economic determinants of health.”     (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6064105/). GOAL 2.3Strengthen Built and Natural Infrastructure to Promote Health and Well-beingSPOTLIGHTTREES LOUISVILLETrees Louisville works to protect and expand Louisville’s urban forest through tree planting, public awareness, education and collaboration.  Data source: "Louisville Loop Master Plan", 2013, by Louisville Metro CouncilThe Louisville Loop celebrates the city’s history and natural world. The vision of the Louisville Loop is to develop an estimated 100-mile loop path system that becomes an essential component for the growth and prosperity of the region.  It will form a network of shared-use paths, soft surface trails, on road bike lanes, and stream corridors and connect the Olmsted Parkways, greenways and transit routes.  The intent of the loop is to leverage the impact of the original Olmsted Park and Parkway system and to help shape the future experience of Louisville.1 1 Louisville Loop Maser Plan.  Connecting People to a Greener Healthier Community.2972The Loop connects peopleThe Loop connects parksThe Loop connects services28598741.5K7210Kcity neighborhoodsparks within ½ mile of the Loopplaygrounds within a ½ mile of the Loop**in public parksor 42% schools are within 1 mile of the Loop. 11small cities around countyparks connected by the LoopOlmsted Parksof households in the county live within 1 mile of the Loopacres of parkland within ½ mileretail establishments within 1 mile of the Loop66of Louisville's Metro population live within 1 mile of the loop %%UPDATE AT THE END8283RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLELouisville residents have the right to live in a safe and healthy city that assures mobility and an environment built upon a strong infrastructure.  To be a healthy city, we address the needs of vulnerable populations and tackle issues such as fair, quality housing and equitable food systems. Louisville is a city that addresses violence and substance misuse, a city that supports individuals who have been victimized, provides opportunities for re-entering citizens to be productive, and seeks alternatives to incarceration for non-violent offenders.  Building a safe and healthy city is a process, not an outcome (World Health Organization).  And while researchers agree that “a city is a human construct” it often is built and organized upon ineffective, historical policies that create unfairness leading to a host of inequities.  A safe and healthy city is a clean, safe environment that allows residents to provide direction and provides access to a variety of opportunities and resources.  Ensure a Safe + Healthy CitySustainable Development GoalsAt A Glance3 Goals2.2 Implement Trauma- informed Violence Reduction Strategies2.3 Strengthen Built and Natural Infrastructure to Promote Health and Well-being  2.1 Address the Needs of Louisville's Most Vulnerable Populations 18 Actions Work with stakeholders to build a movement for health equity.Advocate for policies that support trauma-informed services to children, families and communities.Advocate for policies that support trauma-informed services to children, families and communities.Develop and preserve new and/or rehabilitated quality affordable housing.Promote the development of a more robust and equitable food system focused on waste reduction, donation and composting. Tackle mental health issues that may lead to homelessness, crime, and addiction. Develop and adopt an environmental justice policy for the city, outlining and instructing decision-makers on how to better engage and protect environmentally at-risk communities.Respond to the substance use epidemic through prevention, harm reduction, treatment, and recovery. Create a safe platform for individuals who have experienced trauma to share their stories.Support programs that offer case management to non-violent offenders to avoid jail time. Promote civic engagement and collaboration, leading to community actions. Prioritize areas with low tree canopy.Improve and maintain a stable, multimodal transportation system that effectively integrates all modes of mobility, from walking, biking, and transit, to driving to ensure availability, accessibility and affordability. Increase renewable energy at multiple scales. Expand green infrastructure and spaces: Parkland and open spaces.Expand green infrastructure and spaces: Metro Sewer District (MSD) Green Infrastructure Program.Expand green infrastructure and spaces: Mill Creek Greenway.Implement Strategies to Mitigate Climate Change Impacts.2.1.12.1.22.1.32.1.42.1.52.1.62.1.72.1.82.2.12.2.22.2.32.3.12.3.22.3.32.3.42.3.52.3.62.3.7VISION 01: EMBRACE LIFELONG LEARNING

"We will coordinate our work to make sure 
our students have what they need to succeed 

in school and in life."

State of the City, Mayor Greg Fischer

MAYOR'S STRATEGIC PLAN TARGETS

•  Align wrap-around support services, including academic, social service, health and 

medical interventions, with needs identified by Evolve 502 by 2020.

•  Ensure that 77% of students entering kindergarten are “school ready,” by 2020.
•  Ensure that 70% of high school graduates are transition ready and increase percent of 

high school graduates going to college by 85% by 2020.

•  Ensure that 40% of working age adults earns a bachelor’s degree or higher and 10% earns 

an Associate’s degree by 2020.

62

63

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLE05 Actions 
1.1.1

1.1.2

1.1.3
 

1.2.1

1.2.2

Build the infrastructure for Evolve502: Louisville’s Promise from Cradle to Career.
Improve the quality of learning experiences for children, youth and young adults 
during the summer and out-of-school time.
Ensure that students entering kindergarten are school-ready.

Develop partnerships with the business community to provide youth with 
mentorship and real-job experience (Innovation Works, Inc.)
Develop partnerships with the business community to provide youth with 
mentorship and real-job experience (KentuckianaWorks)

2 Goals 
1.1 
Ensure Equitable
Education 
Attainment
for All Residents 

1.2 
Attract, Retain 
and Develop 
Talent for the 
Workforce of the 
Future

Embrace Lifelong 
Learning

Education is a continuous process that occurs throughout 
life allowing people to reach their full potential.  Through 
lifelong learning every resident is equipped for college, a 
career and a successful, productive life.  We focus on the 
whole child’s development - mental, physical, and social 
to assure that children are ready for school and families 
have their basic needs met and the resources to prosper.  
Adults understand the impact of trauma on children and 
families and help the child navigate to a level of resilience 
that supports ongoing personal growth.  Together we will 
open the doors to opportunities that enrich learning and 
continuously provide children with possibilities leading to 
a successful life.  Louisville is positioned to secure a strong, 
talented workforce leading to greater opportunities for our 
city.

“In education, the term equity refers to the principle of 
fairness.  While it is often used interchangeably with the 
related principle of equality, equity encompasses a wide 
variety of educational models, programs, and strategies 
that may be considered fair, but not necessarily equal.  It 
has been said that ‘equity is the process; equality is the 
outcome,’ given that equity – what is fair and just – may not 
in the process of education reflect strict equality – what is 
applied, allocated, or distributed equally.”    

- The Glossary of Education Reform.

Sustainable Development Goals

64

65

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWGOAL 1.1
Ensure Equitable 
Education Attainment 
for All Residents 

Too often children enter school on an unleveled playing field. These 
children have experienced less opportunity to prepare for school 
and are not ready to enter kindergarten at the same levvel as other 
children of the same age. Such lack of equal opportunity creates a 
lack of educational fairness. Education relates to a person’s quality 
of life predicting employment opportunities, financial stability, 
and overall well-being.  In Louisville, the neighborhoods with the 
lowest incomes also have the greatest number of residents without 
high school diplomas and the highest unemployment rates. These 
neighborhoods have a high percentage of children receiving free 
and reduced lunches. 

SPOTLIGHT
FAMILY SCHOLAR HOUSE 

Family Scholar House (FHS) helps single 
mothers find stability and teaches them 
life skills. Jasmine Wilkins, one of the 
FHS participants, is picture here with her 
daughter Brooklyn. 

Educational disparities have multidimensional ramifications, affecting 
parents’ earning potential, job stability and ability to support their children’s 
education. Furthermore, families in poverty are more likely to live in areas 
with poor air quality, leading to heightened rates of asthma and thus more 
absent days from school. When examining who is college and career-ready, 
only 52% of children who are eligible for free and reduced-price lunch 
are ready compared to 77% of the children who are not eligible for free 
and reduced-price lunch1. In fact, only 43% of children qualifying for lunch 
assistance are kindergarten ready compared to 71% of the children who do 
not qualify.    

Large Racial Wealth Gaps Also for College Grads

Median Household Net Worth, by Race/Ethnicity and Education, 2016

Thousands of 2016 $

Black-white 
wealth gap, no 
college: -89%

Black-white wealth gap, 
4-year college: -83%

390

364

96

68

74

11

18

41

NON COLLEGE GRADS

4-YEAR COLLEGE GRADS

450

400

350

300

250

20

150

100

50

0

•  A college degree brings 

greater median wealth for all 
groups

•  However, the racial wealth 

divide is almost as large 
among college-educated 
families

• 

Four-year college degree 
narrows the black-white gap 
only from 89 to 83 percent

Black 

 

Hispanic, Any Race 

 

Other Races 

 

White, Non-Hispanic

Note: College grads include any family headed by someone with a four-year degree or 
higher, Source: Federal Reserve Board’s Survey of Consumer Finances.

66

67

1 

Greater Louisville Project, Poverty Beyond Income

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWTIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

OWNERS
Evolve502:  
Louisville’s Promise 
from Cradle to Career

RELATED PLANS
Say Yes to Education 
Theory of Action

ACTION 1.1.1
Build the infrastructure 
for Evolve502:  Louisville’s 
Promise from Cradle to 
Career.

Key Next Steps

•  Develop and execute a comprehensive fundraising plan to 

• 

support the scholarship offering and operations. 
Identify and implement taskforces to research and define wrap-
around supports and programs for children and their families. 

•  Create branding and communication plans.
•  Set-up Executive Scholarship offering.

Background
It is our vision that every child in Louisville is 
prepared for college, career and a successful, 
productive life. To reach our vision, Evolve 502 will provide 
personalized wrap-around supports, realign community resources to 
better serve student needs, and create a promise scholarship that 
eliminates financial barriers to postsecondary education. We will 
use a strategic data approach, analyzing both student progression 
along a developmental pathway and fiscal data from government 
and the school district.  This analysis will highlight opportunities 
to align dollars with our priorities for improved student outcomes. 
This data will then be used to inform task forces to design local 
solutions to persistent barriers. To make postsecondary education 
more accessible and affordable, we will also provide free college 
to any JCPS student to attend any Kentucky Community and 
Technical College or Simmons College of Kentucky. In addition 
to covering tuition and fees, we will provide an opportunity 
grant of additional funds for our lowest income students to 
help with other expenses that might impede their persistence.                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                               

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Achieved five-years of 

operational support and free 
college for approximately 
16,000 students over a 20-
year period.
Increased opportunity for 
educational attainment and 
success by removing barriers.

• 

•  Broadened community 

awareness of Evolve 502’s 
mission leading to increased 
community engagement.

•  Offering affordable access to 

postsecondary education.

Why is it important?
While we have made some progress with the educational attainment 
of our working adults, Louisville remains below the mean among its 
peer cities.  We are faced with significant educational gaps between 
white and black adults and K-12 students within JCPS due to poverty 
and inequities in education, health and well-being. 

PARTNERS
Louisville Metro Government, Jefferson County Public Schools, 
Jefferson County Teachers Association, Metro United Way, Louisville 
Urban League, 55,000 Degrees, 15,000 Degrees, Centerstone, 
James Graham Brown Foundation, CE & S Foundation, Community 
Foundation of Louisville, University of Louisville, Jefferson 
Community and Technical College, Spalding University, Simmons 
College of Kentucky, Kentuckiana Works, YMCA of Greater 
Louisville, Interapt, Americana Community Center, La Casita Center                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                       

68

69

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWTIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

OWNERS
The Louisville Metro 
Office of Resilience 
and Community 
Services, Metro 
United Way, and 
Jefferson County 
Public Schools

ACTION 1.1.2
Improve the quality of 
learning experiences for 
children, youth and young 
adults during the summer 
and out-of-school time.

Key Next Steps
•  Expand the Youth Program Quality Intervention (YPQI) model 
to Out-Of-School Time (OST) sites throughout Louisville as a 
best practice standard. BLOCS (Building Louisville's Out-of-
School Time Coordinated System) will do this by providing the 
necessary supports including External Coaching for programs 
to implement fully the YPQI best practices, regardless of the 
programs’ size and capacity. 

•  Furthermore, we will collect data and measure results to report 

the impact these interventions have on community youth 
outcomes. 

Background
Focused on improving the quality of Louisville’s out-of-school time 
(OST) programs, BLOCS provides interventions through training, 
professional development, assessment, program improvement 
planning, technical assistance, external coaching and leveraging 
financial resources. Data over the past four years shows that these 
interventions have improved the quality of OST programs in the 
BLOCS network by an average of 14% and positively are impacting 
the academic and social-emotional learning (SEL) outcomes of youth 
such as improved school attendance and reduced school suspension 
rates. BLOCS has expanded its best practices across 103 OST sites, 
impacting over 5,200 JCPS students of which 81% of participating 
students are eligible for free/reduced lunch and 76% are non-white.            

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
• 

Increase the number of BLOCS 
sites that improve their quality 
annually from the fall to spring 
time period.

•  Maintain aggregate 

Instructional Total Score (ITS) 
for BLOCS network at or 
above national average.
Improve youth social-
emotional learning.   
Improve academic 
performance of youth 
participants.

• 

• 

Why is it important?

The 2017 JCPS high school graduation rate was 80.6%, however, 
the JCPS college/career-ready rate was only 58.8%. Clearly, there is 
a large gap between the number of young people graduating from 
high school and the number of students ready with the tools and 
skills needed to be successful after high school. Quality out-of-school 
time (OST) programs can shrink this gap.  

PARTNERS
Jefferson Community & Technical College, Louisville Alliance for 
Youth

70

71

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWACTION 1.1.3
Ensure that students  
entering kindergarten  
are school-ready.

TIME-FRAME
5+ Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

Key Next Steps
• 

Increase the number of early childhood providers that have 
cultivated best practice skill sets that ensure children are 
kindergarten ready.                                                                                                       

OWNER
Metro United Way

Background

RELATED PLANS
EVOLVE502: 
Louisville’s Promise 
from Cradle to Career

In 2014, Mayor Greg Fischer called for a “cradle-to-career” 
framework and asked Metro United Way to lead the Early Childhood 
Pillar.  In 2015, partners formalized the Ready for K Alliance 
structure, collective commitment and key areas of focus.  Our goal 
is to develop collaborative networks of early care and education 
providers, partners and other key stakeholders to provide a 
seamless system of support for children from birth to kindergarten 
entry via evidence-based best practices in the areas of access, 
quality, engagement and transitioning into kindergarten.    
The bottom line is that 77% of children will enter kindergarten 
prepared.                                                                                                                 

                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                   

Why is it important?
In 2018-2019, 48% of children in Jefferson County Public 
Schools entered kindergarten underprepared.   

PARTNERS
The CE&S Foundation, Community Coordinated Child 
Care, Jefferson County Public Schools, National Center 
for Families Learning, Metro United Way, Louisville 
Department of Public Health and Wellness, University of 
Louisville College of Education and Human Development                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                            

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
Improve Access to and Quality of Child 
Care:
• 

Increased quality of teaching through 
training, coaching and best practices.
Increased quality of and access to early 
care and education programs.

• 

Improve Family and Caregiver Engagement:
• 

Increased use of developmental 
screeners.

•  Engaged children and families in everyday 

activities to build word knowledge and 
vocabulary.

•  Promoted vocabulary development 

through multiple strategies that meet 
families where they are. 

Improve Transitions to Kindergarten:
Increased parents and caregivers 
• 
knowledge of and involvement in helping 
ensure their children are ready for school. 

•  Created a shared understanding and 

ownership of kindergarten readiness to 
ensure partnerships. among community, 
families, and schools so that children 
transition to school smoothly.
Increased opportunities for families 
& schools to develop early, strong 
partnerships.

• 

72

73

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROW“Within our schools, we are experiencing huge achievement gaps between 
white and black students, high suspension rates for minorities and health 
inequities.  Education is the most critical pathway to financial independence, 
health and well-being and serves as a great equalize for success and 
personal achievement.”  

– Marland Cole, Evolve502

GOAL 1.2
Attract, Retain and 
Develop Talent for 
the Workforce of the 
Future 

A basic tenet of Evolve 502: Louisville’s Promise from Cradle to 
Career is workforce readiness.  Lifelong learners are prepared to 
move forward with new career opportunities attracting economic 
development. With the growth of technology, employers 
increasingly seek individuals who attained skill sets to master new 
technology.  Learning pathways connect students to meaningful 
work and assure employees are prepared to evolve with a changing 
world.

SPOTLIGHT
SUMMERWORKS 

In 2018, the SummerWorks Program 
placed more than 6,200 young people 
ages 16-21 to work in hospitals, 
restaurants, museums, banks and hotels. 

74

75

Data source: "From Data to Action: 15 Years Beyond Merger", 2018, by The Greater Louisville Project

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROW10%20%40%30%50%60%70%80%Bachelor's Degrees or HigherGeographyYoung Adult Bachelor's Degrees or HigherA skilled and educated populace is the foundation of any thriving city. Educated cities not only attract more 21st-century jobs that alleviate poverty and boost prosperity but are also able to reinvent themselves even after negative events, such as an economic downturn. Providing access to education is one of the the most promising ways we can build and sustain a greater Louisville.Since 2010, Louisville’s goal has been for 40% of working adults to hold bachelor’s degrees. Data show that that goal has not been reached and significant gaps exist both between White and Black residents and across geographies, but the percentage of Louisvillians with degrees is growing at a faster pace than most of our peers. Since 2000, Louisville’s ranking in working adult bachelor's degree attainment has increased from 14th to 11th among 17 peer cities.This graph compares Louisville to the cities that have improved the most and the least within our peer group since 2000. From 2000 to 2017, the percentage of adults with a bachelor’s degree or higher increased in Louisville nearly as quickly as Grand Rapids, the most improved peer city. Despite this strong progress, Louisville remains below the peer city mean due to its history as a relatively undereducated city.DEGREE AND CERTIFICATE GROWTHMAIN METRIC:Current: 35%Goal: 40%EDUCATIONRanked11thSource: American CommunitySurvey Table B15001Source: American Community Survey ables P148, B15002Source: American Community Survey Tables PCT025, B15001Source: American Community Survey Table B1500149%44%43%40%40%39%39%39%37%35%35%35%34%33%33%32%32%CharlotteSt. LouisNashvilleColumbusOmahaKnoxvilleCincinnatiGrand RapidsGreensboroGreenvilleLouisvilleBirminghamOklahoma CityIndianapolisMemphisKansas CityTulsaBachelor's Degrees or HigherSource: American Community Survey Table B15001••••Over the past 15 years, the number of young adults with bachelor’s degrees in Louisville has increased. However, the city is still below the peer mean, and the growth in the percentage of young adults with bachelor’s degrees has stagnated in recent years.30%35%40%45%Louisville75th PercentilePeer City Mean25th PercentilePeerGrowthAges 25 to 343-year rolling average30.7%38.2%2000200620082010201220142016200020062008201020122014201620%10%30%40%50%50%White LouisvilleWhite Peer MeanBlack LouisvilleBlack Peer Mean25th and 75thPercentiles•••••RaceAges 25 to 643-year rolling average18.3%27.2%11.9%36.6%Louisville ranks 11th among its peer cities for the number young adults (ages 25-34) with a bachelor’s degree or higher. This places the city below the peer city mean and in the bottom cluster of our peer group, with only 38.1% of young adult residents holding a bachelor’s degree or higher. ••••LouisvilleHighest growth: Grand RapidsLowest growth: TulsaPeer MeanPeer GrowthAges 25 to 643-year rolling average200020062008201020122014201620%10%30%40%Education Pipeline changes 2007 to 2016Attended collegeDid not graduate high schoolDid not go to collegePersisted past first yearGraduated college13%14%19%22%32%24%13%17%14%32%2016200727.4%34.7%34Source: American Community Survey Table B1500154%52%47%46%44%43%43%43%41%41%38%37%36%35%35%33%30%NashvilleCharlotteSt. LouisColumbusGrand RapidsOmahaCincinnatiKnoxvilleBirminghamIndianapolisLouisvilleGreenvilleOklahoma CityKansas CityGreensboroMemphisTulsaRanked11thLifelong Learning and Talent AttractionCertificates have increasingly become a meansof accessing higher-wage jobs.Louisville currently ranks among the top of its peer cities in measures of certificate holders. 2017 data reveal that 23% of Louisville residents held a certificate, 50% held a certificate or a higher degree, and 4% held only a certificate. Additionally, we rank 4th among our peers for associate degree attainment for young adults.Source: GLP analysis of Current Population Survey MicrodataNetMigrationBachelor’s Degree or Higher3-year rolling averageSource: American Community Survey Table B07009, B07409••••Louisville75th PercentilePeer City Mean25th Percentile200820102012201420161,800-600Source: American Community Survey Table B150012000200620082010201220142016While Louisville is advancing from the 25th percentile to the peer city mean, it continues to fall below the peer mean for the percentage of adults with an associate degree.36%40%44%48%••••Louisville75th PercentilePeer City Mean25th PercentileAssociate Degreesor HigherAges 25 to 643-year rolling average34%43.3%-10000100020003000Louisville ranks 5th in our peer group for homeownership. Around 61% of residents own their home. White residents are more likely than Black residents to own their homes. More Black residents than White residents are living in burdened homes, owned and rented.Cost-burdened households pay more than 30% of their income toward rent. Louisville has the fourth-lowest rate of burdened households among its peers thanks to a relatively low cost of living. However, West End residents are far more likely tolive in burdened households than residents of other parts of the city.The Arts Vibrancy Index combines several indices of arts providers and arts dollars in a community. Louisville is near the peer mean on the Arts Vibrancy Index. The data is heavily skewed by Nashville's large music industry, and it should be noted that Louisville outperforms most peer cities. Louisville's biggest strength relative to its peers is its number of nonprofit arts and culture organizations, and it's largest weakness is the total revenue generated by the arts sector. The Arts Vibrancy Index is adapted from SMU's DataArts program.QUALITY OF PLACEHousing1020403050607080Minutes (one-way)West End residents are twice as likely as residents of the rest of the city to have a daily commute of over two hours.Homeownership Source: American Community Survey Table B2500369%67%64%62%61%61%61%59%59%59%58%58%57%55%54%53%53%Grand RapidsGreenvilleKnoxvilleSt. LouisLouisvilleBirminghamOmahaOklahoma CityTulsaGreensboroKansas CityCincinnatiCharlotteMemphisIndianapolisColumbusNashvilleRanked5thHomeownership, Affordability and Race0%10%20%30%40%50%60%Cost-burdened homeowners13%9%Rent affordablehomes15%29%Cost-burdenedrenters15%38%Rent affordablehousing57%24%White LouisvilleBlack Louisville••Cost-Burdened HouseholdsSource: GLP analysis of ACS microdata from IPUMS-USA26%27%27%27%30%30%30%30%31%31%31%31%31%32%33%35%35%Grand RapidsGreenvilleKnoxvilleLouisvilleCincinnatiOmahaTulsaOklahoma CityKansas CitySt. LouisCharlotteBirminghamColumbusGreensboroNashvilleIndianapolisMemphisRanked4thCommuteTimesHouseholds in PovertySource: American Community Survey Table B170179%10%11%12%13%13%13%14%14%14%14%14%15%15%16%16%18%Grand RapidsCharlotteOmahaGreenvilleSt. LouisKansas CityKnoxvilleGreensboroNashvilleLouisvilleTulsaColumbusOklahoma CityCincinnatiIndianapolisBirminghamMemphisRanked10thThe percentage of households in poverty has decreased from a high of 17% following the Great Recession to 14% in 2017. Louisville's poverty rate is currently at the peer mean.109Livability & Talent AttractionSource: American Community Survey Table B08303-25% – -10%-10% – 0%0% – 10%10% – 25%25% – 50%50% – 80%Population Change (%)Population Change: 2000 - 2017Since 2000, the highest population growth in Louisville has been seen in the eastern part of the county. Most neighborhoods in the West End have seen very slight declines in population. The Portland and California-Parkland neighborhoods lost 17% and 16% of their residents, respectively.Net MigrationSince 2008, the number of people moving out of Louisville has grown larger than the number of people moving into the city. This trend is more pronounced among young adults and residents with bachelor's or graduate degrees.20082010201220142016••••Louisville75th PercentilePeer City Mean25th PercentileNetMigration3-year rolling average10,300Metropolitan Population in the Core CountySource: GLP Analysis of American Community Survey Tables P001, B01003Source: American Community Survey Tables B07001, B07401Since Merger, Louisville has not experienced population loss from the urban core inside the Watterson. However, some neighborhoods have shrunk while others have grown significantly. In general, neighborhoods toward the east of the city have seen the highest population growth. The Louisville population has grown steadily since 2000. Approximately 60% of residents in the broader metropolitan area live in Jefferson County, and Louisville ranks 7th among peer cities in this measure of urban density. The percentage of residents living in the core county has remained largely unchanged since 2000.10%20%40%30%50%60%BurdenedHouseholdsCost-Burdened HouseholdsSource: American Community Survey Table S2503Source: GLP analysis of ACS microdata from IPUMS-USARanked8thSource: GLP Analysis of US Census Bureau County Business Pattern and IRS Business Master File dataNashvilleCincinnatiKansas CitySt. LouisOklahoma CityOmahaIndianapolisLouisvilleKnoxvilleCharlotteTulsaBirminghamGrand RapidsColumbusMemphisGreenvilleGreensboroArts Vibrancy IndexMAIN METRIC:-6k-3k03k6k9k12k15k -4,200ACTION 1.2.1
Develop partnerships with 
the business community 
to provide youth with 
mentorship and real-job 
experience.

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

$

FUNDING
Unfunded

Key Next Steps
•  Build a youth-based, co-owned creative agency to provide 

inexpensive tech design support to nonprofits and other 
organizational members.

OWNER
Innovation Works, Inc.

RELATED PLANS
SummerWorks, CODE
Louisville, Academies
of Louisville, NCWIT
Aspirations in Computing
Aspire IT, aspirations.org.,
Dialogue with John Segal,
and American Dream for
All

Background
Innovation Works, Inc., develops STEAM champions (Science, 
Technology, Engineering, Art and Math) capable of contributing 
to needed cultural transformation by empowering young adults 
with an innovative problem-solving mindset, cutting edge 
technical skills, and hands-on experience while in high school. 
We use a comprehensive approach based on best practices 
and research from the fields of STEAM and psychology to help 
students become the STEAM champions that society needs to 
solve significant challenges like climate change. Through training 
in design-thinking and “the science of well-being", students can 
pursue fulfilling personal lives, and engage in collaborative team-
based design challenges for sustainability-related organizations. 
By providing a community of near-peer and professional role 
models, hands-on mentored technical training, and real-world 
application of entry-level technical skills, underrepresented 
youth can build the confidence and capability to succeed in 
technical roles for local organizations. By providing exposure 
to career opportunities in technology and design, they are 
prepared and motivated to pursue academic pathways to develop 
advanced STEAM skills that better prepare them to succeed 

Why is it important?
and contribute in high-paying, high-impact STEAM careers.                                                                                                                                         
Youth need to be prepared to meet the future job market. A 2019 
Brookings Institution report on automation and artificial intelligence 
warns that 47.9% of work in Louisville and 48.4% in Kentucky could 
be automated in the near future. More creative work, including high-
paid technical roles or those requiring bachelor’s degrees will be less 
affected. Only 23% of Kentuckians have bachelor’s degrees.

PARTNERS
University of Louisville, Speed School of Engineering, 
Department of Computer Engineering & Computer Science, 
Commonwealth Theater Organization, Western High School, 
St. Francis School, Louisville Grows, Inc., SCORE, Six Sigma 
and Advanced Controls, Inc., Genius Loves Company, 
180 Degrees, Phunky Pixel Multi-Media Agency, QLEEK, 
Jefferson County Public Schools, The Root Co-working Space                                                                                                                                            
           

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
• 

Increased organizational 
awareness of students’ value 
to organizational problem-
solving.

•  Growth in students’ awareness 

and perceptions of careers 
that require technical 
competencies and confidence 
in ability to collaborate on 
developing solutions to real-
world challenges.

•  Established student career 

and academic goals and 
measurements of progress.
•  Provided student-created 

tech design support to 
organizations.

76

77

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWACTION 1.2.2
Develop partnerships with 
the business community 
to provide youth with 
mentorship and real-job 
experience. 

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

Key Next Steps
• 

Increase the number of private sector Employer Champions by 
50%.  
Increase alignment between the JCPS Academies of Louisville 
career and technical programs with SummerWorks.

• 

OWNER
KentuckianaWorks

Background

SummerWorks advocates for Louisville’s youth as they enter 
the workforce. This unique, free program offers young people 
an opportunity to explore careers of interest, get real job 
experience, and develop professional references - all  while 
having a strong network of support and resources at their 
fingertips. SummerWorks  partners with employers to identify 
their  business’ needs and use this information to help businesses 
connect with appropriate youth candidates.  Whether young 
people are trying to find their first job or one that advances to 
a professional career, SummerWorks provides support and job 
training that helps youth realize and fulfill their personal goals.                                                                                                                                           
                                                            
                
Why is it important?

Within the Louisville Metropolitan Area, roughly one in ten (11.7%) 
young people aged 16 to 24 who are not institutionalized are not 
working or in school. That amounts to just over 16,000 young adults. 
Youth disconnection is both serious and costly for young people 
and society.  Disconnected youth miss opportunities to learn new 

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
Increased numbers of youth 
• 
have opportunities to work 
at private sector companies, 
placing them on career 
pathways. 
Increased numbers of youth 
gained work experience in 
their discipline of study. 
Increased number of 
companies are hiring youth to 
train in their line of business.

• 

• 

skills, gain experience, and expand their social networks1. They are 
more likely to face persistent poverty and unemployment, engage 
in criminal behavior and substance abuse, and be incarcerated in 
their lifetimes than individuals that were connected in their young 
adult years2. Disconnection costs tax-payers billions of dollars in 
public support and lost tax revenues3. Failing to address the problem 
becomes a self-perpetuating cycle as the children of disconnected 
youth face similar outcomes as their parents4. According to the 
National League of Cities report, “Reengaging Disconnected Youth” 
(2016), exposure to quality, in-demand jobs and different career 
pathways early in their education helps youth understand the array of 
job opportunities available, making it more likely for a young person 
to stay connected.  SummerWorks provides an opportunity for young 
people to gain work experience through a summer job, often their 
first job. It’s a critical first connection to the workforce that sets a 
young person on a path to future education and employment.

PARTNERS
KentuckianaWorks, YouthBuild Louisville, Jefferson County Public 
Schools (JCPS) Transition Readiness/Academies of Louisville                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                      

1 

2 

3 

4 

Adrienne L. Fernandes and Thomas Gabe, “Disconnected Youth: A Look 
at 16- to 24-Year Olds Who are Not Working or in School” (Washington: 
Congressional Research Service, 2015)
Clive R. Belfield, Henry M. Levin, and Rachel Rosen, “The Economic Value of 
Opportunity Youth” (Washington: Civic Enterprises, 2012)
Opportunity Nation. “Youth Disconnection.” (2019) https://opportunityna-
tion.org/disconnected-youth/
Measure of America. “One in Seven: Ranking Youth Disconnection in the 25 
Largest Metro Areas” (2012) 

78

79

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWVISION 02: ENSURE A SAFE + HEALTHY CITY

live.

MAYOR'S STRATEGIC PLAN TARGETS

•  Publish Healthy Louisville 2025 and develop an implementation/monitoring plan by 

December 2019.

•  Reduce violent and property crime offenses each calendar year, beginning in 2019.
•  Reduce homicides and shootings each calendar year, beginning in 2019.
•  Rank among the top quartile of safest communities compared to our “peer cities” as 

identified by the Greater Louisville Project.
Improve the health and wellbeing of employees: 10% by 2020 and 20% by 2021.

• 
•  Build a better public health environment with lawmakers through collaboration and 

education by 2020. 

•  Create a comprehensive opioid surveillance program by February 2020.
•  Reduce non-emergency runs and provide alternative transportation by 2020.
•  Provide strong mentoring and homework helper out-of-school-time programming at 

community centers.

•  Address root causes to violent crimes and bias within the criminal justice system to better 

aid those re-entering the community post-incarceration.

•  Make a healthier, greener and more environmentally friendly city by implementing the 

"We will keep our focus on protecting 
our environment and cultivating our 

outdoor spaces, expanding our festivals, our 

art, music, culture and food scenes."

State of City, Mayor Greg Fischer

Sustain Louisville Plan.

•  Reduce number of persons living in Louisville without shelter by 10% annually over the 

next four years beginning in 2019.

80

81

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEEnsure a Safe + 
Healthy City

Louisville residents have the right to live in a safe and 
healthy city that promotes mobility and an environment 
built upon strong infrastructure.  To be a healthy city, we 
address the needs of vulnerable populations and tackle 
issues such as fair, quality housing and equitable food 
systems. Louisville aims to solve violence and substance 
misuse, a city that supports individuals who have been 
victimized, provides opportunities for re-entering citizens 
to be productive, and seeks alternatives to incarceration for 
non-violent offenders.  

Building a safe and healthy city is a process, not an outcome 
(World Health Organization).  And while researchers 
agree that “a city is a human construct” it often is built 
and organized upon ineffective, historical policies that 
create unfairness leading to a host of inequities.  A safe 
and healthy city is a clean, safe environment that provides 
residents access to a variety of opportunities and resources.  

Sustainable Development Goals

3 Goals
2.1 
Address the 
Needs of 
Louisville's 
Most Vulnerable 
Populations 

2.2 
Implement Trauma- 
informed Violence 
Reduction 
Strategies

2.3 
Strengthen Built 
and Natural 
Infrastructure to 
Promote Health 
and Well-being 
 

UPDATE AT THE END

20 Actions 
2.1.1
2.1.2

Work with stakeholders to build a movement for health equity.
Advocate for policies that support trauma-informed services to children, families
and communities (Office of Safe and Healthy Neighborhoods).
Advocate for policies that support trauma-informed services to children, families
and communities (The Bounce Coalition).
Develop and preserve new and/or rehabilitated quality affordable housing.
Promote the development of a more robust and equitable food system focused on
waste reduction, donation and composting.
Address chronic issues facing individuals who are homeless. 
Develop and adopt an environmental justice policy for the city.
Respond to the substance use epidemic through prevention, harm reduction,
treatment, and recovery.

Create a safe platform for individuals who have experienced trauma to share their
stories.
Support programs that offer case management to non-violent offenders to avoid
jail time.
Promote civic engagement and collaboration, leading to community action plans
that address violence.
Promote civic engagement and collaboration, leading to community action plans
that address violence.

Prioritize areas with low tree canopy.
Improve and maintain a stable, multimodal transportation system that effectively
integrates all modes of mobility, from walking, biking, and transit, to driving to
ensure availability, accessibility and affordability.
Increase renewable energy at multiple scales.
Expand green infrastructure and spaces: Parkland and open spaces.
Expand green infrastructure and spaces: Metro Sewer District (MSD) Green
Infrastructure Program.
Expand green infrastructure and spaces: Mill Creek Greenway.
Implement strategies to mitigate climate change impacts.
Address the aging wastewater, stormwater, and flood protection infrastructure.

2.1.3

2.1.4
2.1.5

2.1.6
2.1.7
2.1.8

2.2.1

2.2.2

2.2.3

2.2.4

2.3.1
2.3.2

2.3.3
2.3.4
2.3.5

2.3.6
2.3.7
2.3.8

82

83

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWAt A GlanceGOAL 2.1
Address the Needs 
of Louisville’s Most 
Vulnerable Populations

The Louisville Metro Center for Health Equity examined 11 root 
causes that lead to health outcomes.  These root causes are 
correlated to quality of life and impact across the life span.  The 
root causes are grounded in food systems that provide accessible 
and nutritious food; environmental quality; affordable and efficient 
housing; safe and accessible transportation; affordable healthcare; 
green and open spaces; opportunities for engagement with the 
arts, music and culture; complete and livable communities; criminal 
justice; and employment that provides a living wage1. Quality of life 
influences health outcomes and in Louisville, there is a 12.6 years 
difference in life expectancy in relationship to a person’s quality of 
life impacted by the root causes.     

1 

Health in All Policies, A Guide for State and Local Governments, 2013

SPOTLIGHT
MEALS ON WHEELS

Volunteers of Meals on Wheels deliver 
hot lunches to around 70 homebound 
seniors every weekday.  

Root causes shape the choices that are available to residents and 
communities, which look different for different communities.  Thousands 
of research studies validate that social, political, physical and economic 
environments impact residents’ health and overall well-being.  Evidence tells 
us that when we come together to align resources and improve policies and 
practices, we see improvements in residents’ health outcome and quality of 
life1.  

Recommendations from Louisville Metro Health Equity Report 

1
3
6
8

Interventions must 
happen at multiple 
levels - individual, 
interpersonal, 
organizational, 
community and policy- 
to have the biggest 
impact on health.

Ensure more 
opportunities for wealth-
building, education, 
and employment in our 
community for those 
that need
it most. 

2
4

Increase and improve systems for data collection, data 
sharing and data analysis across all outcomes. As Louisville
Metro we need to examine where data is missing, and for 
what groups the data does not exist. When possible,
break data down by various groups to get a better picture 
of who is most impacted.

Promote 
policies and 
development 
that protect and 
improve our 
environmental 
quality. 

5

Build our health 
infrastructure to ensure that 
all persons are able to easily 
receive preventative medical 
services as well as
treatment for mental health, 
trauma and substance use 
disorder. 

Expand access to healthy foods by 
examining our policies and practices 
for areas of innovation. 

Support our youngest community 
members by preventing or mitigating 
the effects of trauma and adverse 
childhood experiences.

7
9

Continue to examine our criminal justice 
system for opportunities for improvement 
and changes that will
support the creation of a thriving 
community.

Create opportunities for all 
communities to thrive with access to 
parks, businesses, and community 
organizations.

84

85

Data source: "Louisville Metro Health Equity Report", 2017, by the Center for Health Equity

1 

Louisville Metro Health Equity Report, 2017

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWlive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
• 

Improved quality of life for all 
citizens.
Increased evidence-based 
practices to improve health 
outcomes.  

• 

•  Reduced disparity in life 

expectancy by neighborhood 
and race/ethnicity within 
Jefferson County. 

Why is it important?
                                                                                                                                                      

Across Jefferson County, there is a discrepancy in life expectancy of 
over 12.6 years as a result of systems of power shaping the lives of 
every resident and their health outcomes. 

PARTNERS
The University of Louisville and Louisville Metro Government 
agencies         

ACTION 2.1.1
Work with stakeholders 
to build a movement for 
health equity.

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Fully Funded

$

Key Next Steps

•  Develop a plan to implement the Louisville Metro Community 

Health Plan and increase the use of the Health Impact 
Assessment tool as a method to assure informed decision-
making.

OWNERS
The Louisville Metro 
Department of Public 
Health and Wellness 
Center for Health 
Equity

RELATED PLANS
The Louisville Metro 
Community Health 
Improvement Plan:  
Healthy Louisville 
2025, Healthy 
Improvement plan(s)

Background

The Center for Health Equity works to advance equity across our 
community by supporting projects, policies and research aiming 
to change the correlation between inequities, quality of life, and 
socioeconomic status. The Health Equity Report provides evidence-
based connections between health outcomes, root causes of 
health outcomes, and the historical context that creates inequity. 
In addition, it provides evidence-based best practices to move the 
community forward. The report is a tool for policy makers, residents, 
and Louisville Metro Government employees to better understand 
how they can intervene and create equitable practices for Louisville. 
The Center for Health Equity is working on several other initiatives 
to build a movement for health equity such as actions identified in 
Healthy Louisville 2025 and utilizing Health Impact Assessments 
(HIA). Healthy Louisville 2025 is an action plan stemming from a 
community health needs assessment conducted in 2015 to establish 
major focus areas to work on and improve by 2025. The HIA is a tool 
that uses a flexible, data-driven approach to identify the potential 
health consequences of new policies to develop practical strategies 
to enhance their health benefits and minimize adverse effects. A few 
published HIAs include Parental Incarceration, Children’s Health, and 
an Opportunity to Shift the Future.  These HIAs are conducted in 
collaboration with community members and other stakeholders      

86

87

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWlive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Reduction in trauma 

• 

• 

symptoms.
Increased proficiency in trauma 
treatment models.
Increased number of trauma-
informed and culturally 
relevant systems.

$

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Fully Funded

OWNERS
Office of Safe 
and Healthy 
Neighborhoods

RELATED PLANS
One Love Louisville, 
6-Pillar Violence 
Prevention Strategy

ACTION 2.1.2
Advocate for policies that 
support trauma-informed 
services to children, 
families and communities.  

Key Next Steps
• 

Introduce community stakeholders to Trauma Resilient 
Community (TRC).  

•  Develop community advisory board. 
•  Provide training for service providers.

Background

TRC Initiative will utilize a comprehensive, community-based 
approach consisting of 1) capacity building, 2) community, first 
responder, and referral source education, 3) youth and family 
centered, evidence-based trauma-focused interventions, and 4) 
consumer feedback and evaluation to help youth and their families 
overcome the effects of trauma. Specifically, this project will 1) 
increase knowledge and skills of personnel who make referrals 
and provide services to children and families regarding trauma, 
community violence, and related services, 2) provide trauma-
focused intervention services to children and their families exposed 
to community violence, and 3) evaluate the impact of the project on 
consumers of this proposed project. The TRC Initiative will develop 
a community-engaged advisory board (Champions of Community 
Challenges) to increase trauma awareness among community 
leaders, enhance outreach and training across multiple sectors, and 
identify the effects of adverse community experiences in order to 
address their manifestations in the community. Additionally, TRC will 
engage in trauma-informed community and referral source training 
in order to develop a common language, build engagement within 
the community and establish a safe communication process for 
all collaborators to follow. Project-related activities, services, and 

outreach efforts will target West and South Louisville communities, 
where high-risk youth and families most affected by trauma, 
violence, and civil unrest reside. By the completion of the project, 
200 clinicians will have been trained in evidence-based trauma 
interventions (e.g. AF-CBT, CBITS, Parent University), 400 children 
and their families in West and South Louisville will have been 
provided trauma treatment and education, 40 service providers, 
public school officials, and leaders will become local trainers in the 
Sanctuary Model® (Champions for Community Change), and 50 
community agencies serving youth exposed to community violence 
and trauma will have become trauma-informed, including 12 
“backbone” agencies that will become certified Sanctuary Model® 
organizations.  Project evaluation findings will be disseminated 
through presentations and publications, with an emphasis on the 
project’s impact and lessons learned regarding how to best respond 
to the needs of youth and families exposed to community violence.

Why is it important?

In 2016, there were 123 homicides in Jefferson County, breaking the 
previous record of 110 set 45 years earlier in 1971. The 2016 total 
amounted to a 46% increase from the previous year and was over 
double the number of homicides in 2014. While some other large 
cities like Chicago have seen a large increase in homicides over 
the past year, Louisville’s increase ranked among the highest in the 
country. Kentucky is one of the five states with the highest rates of 
death linked to drug overdose at 29.9 per 100,000, according to the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  With a population of 
about 590,000, Louisville is the largest city in Jefferson County, which 
has experienced the greatest number of drug-related overdose 
deaths in the state during 2015 and 2016.  Overall drug-related 
overdose deaths increased by 48% during that time period, from 220 
in 2015 to 325 in 2016.  Furthermore, the community experienced 
over five times more fentanyl-related deaths with 139 in 2016, 
compared to 26 in 2015.   

PARTNERS
University of Louisville Kent School of Social Work, Centerstone 
KY, Center for Trauma Resilient Communities, Spalding University, 
Cardinal Success Program, Office of Resilience and Community 
Services

88

89

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWlive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
• 

Implemented policy and 
system changes leading to 
trauma inform systems and 
mitigate the impact of adverse 
childhood experiences.
Increased resiliency and 
protective factors.
Increased skills to effectively 
address trauma.
Increased parental awareness.

• 

• 

• 

TIME-FRAME
5+ Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

OWNERS
The Bounce Coalition

RELATED PLANS
National Child Traumatic 
Stress Network, 
Kentucky Youth 
Advocates Kids Count 
Databook, Resilience: 
The Biology of Stress 
and Science of Hope

ACTION 2.1.3
Advocate for policies that 
support trauma-informed 
services to children, 
families and communities.  

Key Next Steps
•  Advocate for policy and system changes by providing trauma-

• 

awareness education and training throughout
Louisville Metro working in partnership with Kentucky Youth 
Advocates and the Face It® Movement to advocate on the state 
level.

Background

In 2013, Louisville Metro Government convened community 
stakeholders to identify how today’s children can have a healthy, 
productive life when they become adults. From that convening, the 
partners formed the Bounce Coalition. Children today face toxic 
stressors that can have a life-long impact on their ability to thrive – 
physically, emotionally, and socially. While it’s impossible to protect 
youth from all of life’s ups and downs, there are tools to help them 
respond to adversity by building resiliency and grit. Bounce is a 
bold endeavor designed to do that. Bounce’s mission is to build 
resiliency of children and families by improving knowledge about 
the impact of Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) and the skills 
to help youth bounce back from adversity. Bounce draws on strong 
evidence that ACEs are linked to long-term behavioral, mental and 
health risks. The good news is that trauma need not define one’s 
destiny. There is a growing body of knowledge that helps individuals 
and organizations recognize and respond to trauma, building 
protective facts and shifting the perspective from “What is wrong 
with you?” to “What happened to you?” The Bounce partners train 
and educate school administration and staff, parents and caregivers, 
out-of-school time workers as well as the faith and medical 

communities, service providers, social workers, and the community-
at-large locally, across Kentucky, and in neighboring states. Bounce 
strengthens referral networks when more help is needed for the child 
and family and advocates for policies that support trauma-informed 
communities. Bounce also provides consultation and evaluation 
services to measure impact. 

The efficacy of Bounce training in the school system has been 
measured by a rigorous evaluation process using comparison 
schools and the school district-at-large as well as surveys of out-of 
school time workers, and we have promising outcomes: 85.7% of 
staff described their skill in providing effective support to students 
experiencing traumatic events as “adequate” or “extensive” in 
the spring of 2017 compared to 29.5% in the fall of 2014 (56% 
improvement). Out-of-school suspensions increased at a lower 
rate than the control school while the overall suspension rate for 
elementary school increased 94%. Parent conferences jumped 195% 
from 2014 to 2017. PTA membership grew from zero in 2014 to 213 
members in 2017. Teacher retention improved: 90.2% in 2017 vs 
87.7% in 2014.

Why is it important?

Extensive research links adverse childhood experiences to life-
threatening chronic diseases such as diabetes, heart disease, cancer 
and obesity. ACEs are profound in Kentucky where 27% of children 
have experienced one ACE, 13% experienced two ACEs and 14% 
experienced three to eight ACEs – ranking among the highest in the 
nation.

PARTNERS
Louisville Metro Government, American Heart Association, Center 
for Women and Families, Centerstone of Kentucky, Community 
Foundation of Louisville, Family & Children’s Place, Family Health 
Centers, Foundation for a Healthy Kentucky, Jefferson County 
Public Schools, Kentucky Cabinet for Health & Family Services, 
Kentucky Youth Advocates/Face It Movement, Life Adventure 
Center, Making Changes Together, Metro United Way, Norton 
Healthcare, Passport Health Plan, Smoketown Family Wellness 
Center, St. Paul’s United Methodist Church, University of Louisville 
BRICC Coalition, University of Louisville Hospital, YMCA of 
Greater Louisville.

90

91

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWACTION 2.1.4
Develop and preserve 
new and/or rehabilitated 
quality and affordable 
housing.

Key Next Steps

Create funding opportunities to:
•  Sustain the affordable housing initiative;
•  Help create new, affordable homeownership and wealth creation 

opportunities;

•  Acquire and rehabilitate unsubsidized affordable housing units;
•  Build equity while renting; and
•  Adopt a systematic code enforcement program for rentals.

Promote policy for:
•  Affordable and market-rate housing while directing Louisville 

Metro investment to those areas;

•  Anti-displacement measures;
• 

Inclusionary zoning regulations, extending the period of 
affordability on housing projects, 

•  Establishing a lien release and code violation forgiveness 

program;

•  Reducing parking requirements for affordable housing 

developments;

•  Utilizing the Health Impact Assessment tool for creating and 

preserving housing units; and 
Incorporating cool roofs standards.     

• 

Background
Louisville Metro must do more to address the 72,000 cost-burdened 
households, and the Housing Needs Assessment recommends 
policies and funding be directed to support the creation of housing 
for those 31,000 households living in the most severe financial 

$

TIME-FRAME
0-1 Year

FUNDING
Partially Funded 

OWNERS
Louisville Forward/
Develop Louisville

RELATED PLANS
Vision Russell, Russell: 
A Place of Promise, 
Louisville CARES, 
vacant and abandoned 
properties initiatives 
(multiple), Housing 
Needs Assessment, 
Plan 2040 and related 
neighborhood plans, 
Market rate housing 
initiatives, CDBG 
and HOME funding 
programs, affordable 
housing initiatives 

live

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Housed 2,500 families to be 
housed at 0-30% AMI (Area 
Median Income) 

•  Produced a minimum of 5,000 
units every 5 years for people 
earning less than 80% AMI

constraints.  By subsidizing units for those at 30% of Area Median 
Income (AMI) or below, a “cascading” effect occurs in the market 
that will open more affordable units for those households at 50%, 
60%, 80% or otherwise below 100% of AMI.  Additional revenue 
streams, aggressive use of state and federal housing resources, and 
new policies will be necessary to reach these goals.

Why is it important?
The Housing Needs Assessment, released in draft form February 
2019, identifies over 72,000 Louisville household as “cost 
burdened” (i.e., paying more than 30% of their income for rent/
mortgage plus utilities).  Of these 72,000, 31,000 households are 
severely cost burdened and living at or below 30% of area median 
income.   

PARTNERS
Louisville Metro Housing Authority, Develop Louisville/Louisville 
Forward, Affordable Housing Trust Fund, numerous non-profit 
and for-profit housing developers including but not limited to 
REBOUND, HPI, New Directions, River City Housing, LDG, Marian, 
Family Scholar House, Russell: A Place of Promise, LHOME                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                       

92

93

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWlive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
• 

Increased number of 
businesses distributing 
edible food for consuming or 
composting.   

•  Decreased discarded edible 

food.

Why is it important?
In Louisville, an estimated 200,000 tons of food is wasted while 
120,000 of our residents are food insecure.   

PARTNERS
National Resource Defense Council (NRDC), Ad Council, Louisville 
Metro Government, Jefferson County Public Schools, Dare to Care, 
Food Literacy Project, Louisville Grows, Danny Wimmer Presents, 
University of Louisville, Aramark, Kroger, Community Foundation 
of Louisville, Lift a Life Foundation, Louisville Metro United 
Way, KY Harvest, Sysco, New Roots, Community Farm Alliance, 
WestRock Recycling, Passport Health Plan, University of Kentucky, 
GE Appliances, Louisville Farm to Table, Feeding Kentucky, 
Tess Harmon – SNAP Advocate, American Heart Association                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                              

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

OWNERS
Louisville Metro 
Office of Resilience 
and Community 
Services

RELATED PLANS
Healthy Louisville 2025

ACTION 2.1.5
Promote the development 
of a more robust and 
equitable food system 
focused on waste reduction, 
donation and composting.

Key Next Steps
• 

Identify barriers and resources to fully implement a successful 
initiative that feeds the community and conserves spending. 

•  Educate and encourage Louisville residents and businesses to 

reduce food waste.  

•  Advertise the Save the Food Campaign.

Background
The National Resource Defense Council (NRDC) in partnership with 
the Ad Council awarded the Louisville Metro Office of Resilience 
& Community Services a Food Matters: Save the Food grant in 
2018. The first phase of this grant is to develop methodologies 
that estimate how much food is wasted in Louisville and what 
percentage of wasted food could be rescued to feed Louisville’s 
food insecure residents. The partners work with National Resources 
Defense Council (NRDC), the Ad Council, and community to design 
marketing materials and identify advertising outlets for educating 
on the amount of wasted food in Louisville and how to reduce the 
waste.  The partners also are spearheading a second initiative,  
#SAVETHEFOODLOU, and are developing a process to implement 
a plan for addressing food waste and encouraging restaurants 
and organizations to participate in waste reduction, donating, 
and composting.  Louisville Metro Government’s Department of 
Solid Waste Management is offering businesses who operate food 
systems an opportunity to sign-up to the free Re-TRAC Connect 
portal that tracks waste and connects businesses with food donation 
services.      

                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                   

94

95

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWlive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Adoption of low barrier rules 

and trauma-informed practices 
throughout the continuum-of-
care.
Increased number of service 
providers and options for 
individuals who are homeless.
Increased community 
awareness and understanding 
of the root causes of 
homelessness. 

• 

• 

ACTION 2.1.6
Address Chronic Issues 
Facing Individuals Who are 
Homeless.

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

OWNER
Office of Resilience 
and Community 
Services, Coalition for 
the Homeless

RELATED PLANS
Coalition Blueprint for 
Ending Homelessness, 
Louisville Metro 
Surplus Budget 
Plan, Louisville 
Metro Homeless 
Encampment Plan, 
HUD Grant to End 
Youth Homelessness

Key Next Steps
•  Advocate, develop and implement broad-based policies and 

practices.  

•  Move individuals from unsheltered homelessness to services.   

Background
“Every human being who finds themselves living on our 
streets is an individual with their own story and their own 
needs.  We want to treat them with dignity, respect and 
compassion, and do everything we can to help them get the 
resources they need.  That’s a shared goal, and it will take the 
work of all of us to realize that goal.”  - Mayor Greg Fischer.                                                                                                                                         
                                                   
The Mayor’s Homeless Encampment Task Force, a collaborative 
effort to address homelessness, is comprised of more than 
20 partner organizations with over 60 local participants from 
government, business, non-profits, religious leaders, and 
concerned citizens. The Encampment Task Force initially enhanced 
communications among government, police and other stakeholders, 
and established more compassionate policies and procedures for 
interacting with encampments. A “By Name Subcommittee” was 
established which meets monthly to coordinate approaches and 
services when a 21-Day Notice is posted.  This group identifies the 
most vulnerable, unsheltered individuals, coordinates street team 

and case manager outreach and connects individuals to services 
and shelter.  An Operations Subcommittee developed a Standard 
Operation Procedure addressing 21-Day Notice for governmental 
agencies.  This group is now using an electronic tracking of homeless 
encampment complaints. The Best Practices Subcommittee 
identified low barrier shelter as the most pressing need.  In addition, 
this group identified the need for a guide to assist street outreach 
to address infant and toddlers living in unsheltered situations, family 
shelters, and storage space for personal items. Louisville identified 
additional funding mid-year to partially fund low barrier shelter, 
storage, encampment outreach, and family shelter.  This group will 
continue to address expanding service options and community 
awareness of trauma-informed practices that address prevention 
and mitigation of homelessness, while promoting a compassionate 
approach to enforcement.   

Why is it important?
In 2018, there were approximately 7,000 individuals identified as 
homeless in Jefferson County.  These individuals included over 250 
families, over 1,000 children and over 1,500 individuals who were 
identified as victims of domestic violence.  Over the course of the 
year, 632 individuals were identified as unsheltered.  In the fall of 
2018, an encampment was cleared without notice to the residents, 
causing numerous important personal items to be destroyed and 
lost.  The experience raised concerns for individuals who were 
living in unsheltered situations and gave rise to a new and model 
ordinance requiring a 21-Day Notice be given to both the individuals 
in the camps and outreach and service providers prompting the 
establishment of the Mayor’s Homeless Encampment Task Force.   

PARTNERS
University of Louisville, Louisville Metro Police Department, 
Louisville Metro Solid Waste Management Services, Codes 
and Regs, Louisville Metro Public Health & Wellness.  
providers of homeless services, street outreach groups, 
individuals who were formerly homeless, community 
members, Louisville Metro Council Members, Centerstone KY.                                                                                                                                              
                                                  

96

97

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWlive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Presented draft of 

environmental justice policy to 
the mayor and Louisville Metro 
Council.

Why is it important?
Persons of color and those living at or below the poverty line 
are subjected to some of the worst environmental hazards our 
community faces. The health outcomes that come from living within 
proximity to environmental hazards manifest inequitably across 
Louisville and point to the need for local action. 

PARTNERS
West Jefferson County Community Task Force (WJCCTF), 
Metropolitan Sewer District (MSD), Metro Housing Coalition 
(MHC), One West, KIPDA, Rubbertown Emergency 
ACTion (REACT), University of Louisville – Environment 
Institute, Center for Neighborhoods, TARC, Kentuckians 
for the Commonwealth, Black Lives Matter Louisville                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                

Environmental Justice Hotspots for 
Hazardous Waste Proximity, as mapped 
by The Environmental Protection Agency 

ACTION 2.1.7
Develop and adopt an 
environmental justice policy 
for the city.  

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years 

$

FUNDING
Unfunded

OWNERS
Louisville Resilience, 
Louisville Forward, 
Louisville Metro Public 
Health and Wellness, 
Louisville Metro 
Parks and Recreation, 
Louisville Metro Human 
Relations Commission, 
Louisville Metro 
Department of Public 
Works

Key Next Steps
•  Evaluate other municipal-level environmental justice policies for 

best practices and implementation models.  
Identify internal and external stakeholders.  

• 
•  Benchmark other government environmental justice policies and 

programs.  

•  Map data on environmental conditions and environmental-

justice susceptible populations.  

•  Convene stakeholders to discuss data, health impacts, 

and policy options in order to receive feedback and 
recommendations.  

Background

The owners and partners of this action will identify public policies 
and decision-making processes that have the potential to 
disproportionately affect communities burdened by environmental 
risk.  They will prioritize environmental justice policy integration 
through community consultation and open dialogue with 
organizations working to address environmental and social justice 
concerns.  Funds are needed in order to engage the community 
and address environmental risks in the impacted neighborhoods.                                                                                                                                   
                                                   

98

99

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWlive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
Increased in harm reduction 
• 
through use of the syringe 
exchange program.

•  Expanded diversion from 

emergency department and 
jail through crisis diversions 
programs.

•  Established guidelines for 

sober living housing to ensure 
effective residential facilities.

Why is it important?
In 2016, the age-adjusted drug overdose death rate in Louisville 
more than doubled compared to 2011.  Louisville’s number of 
hospitalizations and emergency room visits due to severe acute drug 
poisoning rose from 2,830 visits in 2012 to 4,437 visits in 2016.  In 
2018, Louisville Metro Emergency Services received 6,688 overdose 
calls throughout the county and administered 2,287 patients with 
naloxone. 

PARTNERS
Centerstone, JCPS, Bounce, Community Shield, Office of 
Safe & Healthy Neighborhoods, Volunteers of America, 
Kentucky Harm Reduction Coalition, University of Louisville 
Hospital, University of Louisville School of Public Health and 
Information, Office of Resiliency, Louisville Urban League, 
Treatment Advisory Group (TAG), LMPD, Kentuckiana Works                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                    

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Fully Funded

$

OWNERS
The Louisville Metro 
Department of Public 
Health and Wellness

RELATED PLANS
Coming Together for 
Hope, Healing, and 
Recovery:  A plan to 
address substance use 
and misuse in Louisville

ACTION 2.1.8
Respond to the substance 
use epidemic through  
prevention, harm  
reduction, treatment, and 
recovery.

Key Next Steps

Increase harm reduction; 

Increase trauma informed care; 

Main strategies and priorities for tackling substance use include:
•  Prevent and reduce youth substance use; 
• 
•  Reduce stigma; 
• 
•  Expand diversion from emergency rooms and jail; 
• 
•  Measure the quality of treatment programs; 
•  Establish guidelines for sober living houses; 
•  Make expungement affordable; and 
• 

Improve connection to treatment; 

Improve job placement.

Background

While the challenges of substance use disorder may seem daunting, 
they can be met and overcome through a public health approach. 
On April 23, 2015, Louisville Metro Council, Louisville’s legislative 
body, approved Louisville Metro Government opening of the 
state’s first syringe exchange program. In 2016 the Louisville Metro 
Department of Public Health & Wellness established the Office of 
Addiction Services to address addiction in Louisville. The Substance 
Use Disorder Plan studied root causes, identified risk factors, 
designed interventions to address these factors, and will evaluate 
the effectiveness of those interventions.  This LMPHW action plan 
was designed with the input of Louisville partners committed to 
addressing substance use disorder in our community. 

                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                   

100

101

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWGOAL 2.2
Implement Trauma-
informed Violence 
Reduction Strategies

Violence falls within many categories affecting all ages, races, 
socioeconomic status, ethnicity, sexual orientation and genders - 
domestic violence, workplace violence, dating violence, bullying, 
community violence, child abuse – for example. The residue 
from trauma often impacts lives creating mental and physical 
harm1.  Community violence frequently is unpredictable creating a 
heightened vigilance, building anxiety, and shaping the perception 
of an unsafe world2. Trauma can erect obstacles that impedes 
emotional development blocking children and adults’ abilities to 
thrive3. In Louisville agencies and individuals work to stem the 
prevalence of violence and its negative impact on victims through 
programming, case management, education, and resources.  
Louisville services are extended to the offender by providing 
restorative justice to non-violent offenders and assisting with re-
entry after incarceration. Many work upstream to address the root 
causes of trauma while other programs offer trauma-informed 
interventions such as the Cure Violence model that interrupts 
potentially violent conflicts and works with high-risk individuals.  
A key component of the model is to mobilize the community to 
change norms.4     

1 
2 

3 
4 

www.samhsa.gov/trauma-violence
www.nctsn.org/what-is-child-trauma/trauma/trauma-types/community-vio-
lence
www.ncbi.nlm.nif.gov/books/NBK207191/
http://cureviolence.org/the-model/essential-elements/

SPOTLIGHT
SCARLET'S BAKERY

Scarlet’s Bakery teaches life skills, baking skills, and 
overall work readiness to women as they transition 
toward building more sustainable, healthy futures 
for themselves after experiences years of abuse and 
exploitation.

Louisville works to create pathways away from violence through training, 
support and educational assistance.  We identify and alleviate many of the 
root causes of violence including economic and educational challenges as 
well as historic, systemic barriers to success for people in the neighborhoods 
with the most violent levels of crime.  

“Just as there is no one reason for violence, there is no one solution for alleviating it. 
Together, we’re investing in our youth, supporting young people who are trying to 
change their lives. That, in turn, helps all of us build a safe, more vibrant community,” 

Rashaad Abdur-Rahman, Director of the Office for Safe and Healthy Neighborhoods. 

Louisville Violence Reduction Strategy

Enforcement

Placing laser focus of law enforcement efforts on the small 
percentage of people who commit gun violence while 
ensuring the safety and security of our citizens.

Intervention

A coordinated approach to intervening at the first sign of 
potential violence in the streets, schools, and hospitals to 
reduce violence and to produce a more positive outcome. 

Prevention

Reaching individuals, families, and communities before 
violence happens so that violence is less likely to occur.

Community 
Mobilization
Organizational 
Change and
Development

Pulling together youth, neighborhood residents, community 
organizations, and law enforcement to ensure a culture where 
gun violence is not tolerated.

Transforming policies, practices, and systems to reduce gun 
violence. 

Re-Entry

Assisting those who have committed crimes come back into 
the community by providing resources and opportunities to 
prevent recidivism and re-build community. 

1
2
3
4
5
6

102

Data source: "Louisville Violence Reduction Strategy"

103

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWACTION 2.2.1
Create a safe platform 
for individuals who have 
experienced trauma to 
share their stories.

Key Next Steps
•  Promote cultural equity among arts and culture organizations, 
artists and funders allowing more individuals to express trauma 
and share their stories.

Background
The arts are a powerful tool for healing.  Individuals who have 
experienced trauma can utilize a range of art forms to share their 
stories, including but not limited to visual arts, theater, dance, music 
and the literary arts. Today, arts organizations partner with various 
nonprofit organizations, community centers, senior living facilities 
and hospitals to bring the healing power of the arts to individuals 
through one time or multi-session residencies.

Why is it important?
Individuals who have experienced trauma benefit from using the arts 
to tell their story.  Research indicates that the use of art mitigates 
post-traumatic stress and is an effective, non-threatening method for 
victim to express trauma that may lead to removing barriers towards 
a fuller, healthier life.          

PARTNERS
Louisville Visual Arts (LVA), Commonwealth Theatre Center, Actors 
Theatre, Kentucky Shakespeare.               

                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                         

$

TIME-FRAME
0-5 Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

OWNERS
Fund for the Arts

RELATED PLANS
Imagine Greater 
Louisville 2020

POTENTIAL KEY 
INDICATORS
• 

Increased individuals 
who have participated 
in arts & healing 
reporting their ability to 
cope with trauma.  

PROJECT SPOTLIGHT
RIVER CITY DRUM CORP "SPIRIT OF THE DRUM" 
 
Improving the lives of children through performance and visual 
arts, tutoring, and empowerment. 

A proven way to improve the lives of children is to provide after 
school programs in arts education including performance and 
visual arts, tutoring and empowerment.  The River City Drum Corp 
Culture Arts Institute, Inc. set out to do just that with programs 
designed to enhance the development of African American 
families with children.  By providing a structured environment and 
support system, youth learn to be leaders and create a community 
where live music is enhanced and strengthened through the 
“Spirit of the Drum.”  The purpose of the River City Drum Corp 
is to provide opportunities for families to reconnect to the vast 
historical accomplishments of African Americans in the building of 
America – foundational information for families and the community 
where they live – building self-pride.   While playing drums is the 
means to team and leadership development, the bar is set high 
for youth participants who are accountable for their educational 
achievement.  Adults are on hand to provide tutoring and the 
program incorporates a strong educational component where the 
youth write reflections of their performances.  For over 25 years, 
the River City Drum Corp has enriched Louisville’s youth, families, 
and the community with their drumline showcase at major Louisville 
venues.  But in the end, it is about the youth who have prospered 
through the process.  

104

105

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWACTION 2.2.2
Support programs that   
offer case management to 
non-violent offenders to 
avoid jail time.

ACTION 2.2.3
Promote civic engagement 
and collaboration, leading 
to community action plans 
that address violence.

Key Next Steps

Key Next Steps

TIME-FRAME
5+ Years 

$

FUNDING
Unknown

OWNERS
Restorative Justice 
Louisville 

POTENTIAL KEY 
INDICATORS
•  Decreased number of 

eligible individuals/
charges in the criminal 
justice system.
Increased capacity 
(eligibility of 
individuals and 
charges).

• 

•  Expand Restorative Justice Louisville (RJL) work to reach 1,000 
to 2,000 Louisville youth who are entering the juvenile justice 
system eligible for diversion or an alternative disposition.  

Background
RJLworks to incorporate restorative justice practices as an integral 
component of the local criminal justice system to promote safer 
communities by reducing crime. To do this, RJL partners with the 
local criminal justice system and other community agencies to 
provide diversion and disposition options for youth and young adults.  

Why is it important?

Each year, there are between 4,000 and 6,000 charges filed in 
Jefferson County that involve youth.  For example, 6,813 charges 
were filed in 2014 and 4,047 charges were filed in 2016.  Analysis of 
the data showed that of charges, the most service charge for each 
incident is a misdemeanor offense or a violation (71%).  The data also 
showed that over a third of the charges involve youth receiving their 
first charge.   

PARTNERS
Jefferson County Attorney’s Office, Office of Safe and Health 
Neighborhoods, 
Louisville Metro Criminal 
Justice Commission                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                           

OTHER

VIOLATION 
10% 5%

21%

•  Reduced recidivism. 

106

64%

MISDEMEANOR

CHARGES FILED AGAINST YOUTH

•  Build a comprehensive program inventory of public safety programs 
and metrics to allow decision makers to fully understand the impact 
of initiatives, allowing for operational changes to be made based on a 
systems perspective. 

•  Engage additional Louisville Metro Government agencies and external 

partners for data sharing and collaborative problem-solving efforts. 

•  Develop a communications plan to highlight group success, share best 

practices and engage the community.

Background
SafeStat focuses on improving Louisville’s public safety using a public 
health system approach, shifting the narrative of public safety solely from 
a law enforcement approach. The vision of SafeStat focuses on involving 
multi-sector and city-wide engagement to achieve bold goals utilizing 
radical imagination and disruptive reconstruction.  Radical Imagination 
fuels the will and strengthens the ability of our compassionate community 
and upends old assumptions and civic structures that hold people back 
from experiencing their human potential.  Disruptive reconstructions 
can spark the creation of equitable communities and change policies to 
build and sustain a truly inclusive society. By involving multiple agencies, 
SafeStat members use systems-thinking and problem-solving methods, 
data analytics and evidence-based practices to address challenges, 
improve processes and find opportunities to make Louisville’s public safety 
strategy more effective. 

Multiple programs are being executed across Louisville Metro Government 
and partnerships with external organizations. Data analysis and program 
evaluation occurs but is not completed cross-functionally. Clear measures 
of success for the public safety system have not been articulated by all 
stakeholders.

FELONY

Why is it important?

live

PARTNERS
Louisville Metro Police 
Department, Office of Safe & 
Healthy Neighborhoods, Public 
Health & Wellness, Office 
of Resilience & Community 
Services, Department of 
Corrections, Emergency 
Management Services, 
Youth Detention Services                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                    

TIME-FRAME
0-1 Year

$

FUNDING
Unfunded

OWNERS
Louisville Metro 
Office of Performance 
Improvement and 
Innovation

POTENTIAL KEY 
INDICATORS
•  Created comprehensive 

data system and 
operational dashboards
•  Detailed communication 
strategy and action plan
•  Regularized multi-sector 

engagement

107

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWlive

• 

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
Increased residents’ skills 
• 
and knowledge to promote 
peace.
Increased quality of out-of-
school-time programs for 
Louisville youths.
Increased fathers reporting 
a positive and healthy 
relationship with their 
children.
Increased number of youths 
developing work and 
professional experience. 

• 

• 

$

TIME-FRAME
5+ Years 

FUNDING
Partially Funded

OWNERS
Office for Safe 
and Healthy 
Neighborhoods

RELATED PLANS
One Love Louisville 
Action Plan

ACTION 2.2.4
Promote civic engagement 
and collaboration, leading 
to community action plans 
that address violence.

Increase civic participation in violence prevention efforts.  

Key Next Steps
• 
•  Create a father-friendly city.  
•  Connect job seekers to employment opportunities.  
• 

Improve access for youth to attend high-quality out-of-school-
time programs.

Background
One Love Louisville, a comprehensive strategy, consists of both a 
campaign and a community action plan that inspires and mobilizes 
Louisville residents. The One Love Louisville-Be The One to Make 
a Difference campaign evolved from the January 2015 Louisville 
Blueprint for Safe and Healthy Neighborhoods: Phase II report.  
This campaign is a call to action to all sectors, communities and 
neighborhoods in Louisville, enforcing that every resident has a 
stake in the well-being of our city. The Office for Safe and Healthy 
Neighborhoods, along with its affiliates and partners, strongly 
believe that city violence only can be reduced through a collective 
and organized effort.  One Love Louisville is our strategy to unite 
neighbors to neighbors, provide opportunity for youth and create 
healthy objectives to negate violence.  Everyone has something 
to offer a person in need, a neighborhood or community: there is 
not one single way to "be the one." We work alongside residents, 
faith, and community-based organizations and businesses to ensure 
the One Love Louisville Action Plan is implemented, measured, 
evaluated and disseminated across Louisville.  Residents developed 
each One Love Louisville goal and initiative as a result of years of 

dedicated effort.  Since the Phase II Blueprint release, the Office 
of Safe and Healthy Neighborhoods and community partners have 
collected and presented new data and information to update goals 
and initiatives in the One Love Louisville Phase III Action Plan that will 
be released soon.

Why is it important?

Mayor Fischer created the Violence Prevention Work Group (VPWG) 
in June 2012 to address the prevalence of community violence, 
identify its root causes and develop holistic strategies with long-term 
impacts. Co-chaired by Dr. Blain Hudson and Dr. LaQuandra Nesbitt, 
the VPWG work group - comprised of neighborhood residents, 
corporate, community, faith-based and government partners - 
agreed that a collective decision was necessary to increase positive 
outcomes and decrease Louisville’s violence. In agreement with the 
systems theory, the VPWG pinpointed five areas of engagement 
that impact and/or inform each other and illustrate the scope of the 
Office for Safe and Healthy Neighborhoods: Community Building; 
Education; Employment and Economic Development; Health and 
Social Wellness; and Juvenile and Criminal Justice. 

PARTNERS
BLOCS, Metro United Way, Guiding Light Islamic Center, Center for 
Neighborhoods, Louisville Urban League, SummerWorks, Louisville 
Metro Public Health & Wellness, KentuckianaWorks, Louisville Health 
Advisory Board, Louisville Metro Police Department, 2not1, 4 Your 
Child, Private Citizens

                                                                                                                                                      
                                       

108

109

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWGOAL 2.3
Strengthen Built and 
Natural Infrastructure 
to Promote Health 
and Well-being

“Natural environments affect human health and well-being both 
directly and indirectly,”1.  Historical civilizations to today’s modern 
society recognize the need for the green environment and its 
relationship to health. Research documents the role nature plays in 
human health but even more, research indicates that a reduction in 
crime is linked to social cohesion and connection to nature2.   The 
role of built infrastructure shapes necessities such as structure 
development, roadways, storage structure, management of drinking 
water, sewer and storm waste. In modern society, the challenge is 
blending gray and green infrastructures in urban spaces and their 
importance to social interaction3.  Undoubtedly, the built and natural 
environment are linked and influence the “social and economic 
determinants of health”4. 

1 
2 
3 
4 

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Environmental Science
Weinstein, et.al., 2015
http://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cate/vol5/issl/3
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6064105/

SPOTLIGHT
TREES LOUISVILLE

Trees Louisville works to protect and 
expand Louisville’s urban forest through 
tree planting, public awareness, 
education and collaboration.  

The Louisville Loop celebrates the city’s history and natural environmnt. The 
vision of the Louisville Loop is to develop an estimated 100-mile loop path 
system that becomes an essential component for the growth and prosperity 
of the region.  It will form a network of shared-use paths, soft surface trails, 
on road bike lanes, and stream corridors and connect the Olmsted Parkways, 
greenways and transit routes.  The intent of the Loop is to leverage the 
impact of the original Olmsted Park and Parkway system and to help shape 
the future experience of Louisville.1 

The Loop connects people
%

66of Louisville's Metro 

29

city 

neighborhoods

population live within 1 

mile of the loop 

11small cities around 

county

72

%

of households in the 
county live within 1 
mile of the Loop

The Loop connects parks

72

parks within ½ 
mile of the Loop

28

by the Loop

parks connected 

5

Parks

Olmsted 

The Loop connects services

98

*in public parks

playgrounds within a ½ 

mile of the Loop*

74

or 42% schools are 
within 1 mile of the 

Loop. 

10K

acres of parkland 

within ½ mile

1.5K

retail establishments 

within 1 mile of the Loop

Data source: "Louisville Loop Master Plan", 2013, by Louisville Metro Council

1 

Louisville Loop Maser Plan.  Connecting People to a Greener Healthier Community.

110

111

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWlive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Reached a 45% canopy cover 

by 2052.

ACTION 2.3.1
Prioritize areas with 
low tree canopy.

TIME-FRAME
5+ Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

Key Next Steps
•  Educate the community on best management practices for 

planting and maintaining trees.  

•  Provide trees to the public. 
•  Build community partnerships to foster tree planting.

OWNERS
Louisville Metro 
Develop Louisville and 
Louisville Metro Parks

RELATED PLANS
Urban Tree Canopy 
Assessment (2015), 
Green Heart

Background
Louisville Metro Government provides guidance to the community 
as a broad-based effort to reach a 45% tree canopy cover over the 
next forty years. Trees are a vital part of the city’s green infrastructure 
because of the quantifiable environmental, economic, and social 
benefits they provide in addition to the improvements they make 
to air quality, stormwater absorption, and reduction of the urban 
heat island effect.  The 2015 Urban Tree Canopy (UTC) determined 
that the city’s 2012 tree canopy coverage of 37% provided 
approximately $329 million dollars in benefits through stormwater 
reduction, energy savings, property valuation, air pollution removal, 
and carbon sequestration.  Additional value was found in carbon 
storage over the lifetime of the tree canopy equivalent to $231 
million dollars bringing overall tree canopy benefits to a value of 
over $560 million dollars. Being a community-based goal, Louisville 
Metro Government has taken steps to increase tree canopy in areas 
of their control as well as providing resources to the community to 
increase tree quantities on private property which has the greatest 
opportunity for canopy increase.  

Actual Canopy

Future Canopy based on existing trends

45%

40%

40%

38%

37%

Y
P
O
N
A
C

35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

35%

32%

28%

25%

4
0
0
2

8
0
0
2

2
1
0
2

2
2
0
2

2
3
0
2

2
4
0
2

2
5
0
2

YEAR

Data retrieved from Trees Louisville

Why is it important?
Reaching the goal of a 45% tree canopy cover will make Louisville 
more resilient and improve quality of life for citizens now and in 
the future.   Louisville’s 2015 Urban Tree Canopy (UTC) Assessment 
verified that the tree canopy has been declining negatively with an 
average of 54,000 trees lost per year.  The loss is expected to drop 
to 21% over the next forty years if the continuation of the loss trend 
occurs compounded by Ash tree loss from the invasive pest, the 
Emerald Ash Borer.  

PARTNERS
Louisville Forward, Develop Louisville (DV) Office of Sustainability, 
DV Planning and Design, LMG Codes and Regulations, LMG Public 
Works, LMG Metro Parks, Louisville Tree Advisory Committee, 
Louisville Grows, Trees Louisville, Community at large                                             

112

113

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWACTION 2.3.2
Improve and maintain 
a stable, multimodal 
transportation system 
that effectively integrates 
all modes of mobility, 
from walking, biking, and 
transit, to driving to ensure 
availability, accessibility and 
affordability.

Key Next Steps
•  Build an efficient system supported by sustainable sources 
of funding to ensure that the community can respond to any 
potential shocks and stresses. 
Invest in transit and non-single occupancy vehicles.  

• 
•  Strengthen transit system with balanced approach between 

service area coverage and increased frequency on major transit 
corridors. 
Increase bike and pedestrian infrastructure and employ more 
compact zoning.  

• 

•  Extend public transit hours of service (early and late) in 

response to various community needs: access to jobs and 
education, economic development and employment needs at 
the local and regional level.      

Background
Move Louisville, the city’s strategic multi-modal transportation 
plan, identifies key policies and projects for implementation 
through 2040 and seeks to reduce vehicle miles traveled (VMT).  
Reducing VMT will help improve air quality and reduce costly 

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

OWNERS
Transit Authority of 
River City (TARC), 
Louisville Forward/
Develop Louisville

RELATED PLANS
Move Louisville, 
TARC Comprehensive 
Operations Analysis 
and Long-Range 
Plan, Kentuckiana 
Regional Planning and 
Development Agency 
(KIPDA) Regional 
Transportation Plan, 
Bike Louisville, 
Louisville Loop Maser 
Plan, Complete 
Streets, LouVelo, 
Cyclouvia. 

live

road infrastructure investments in the future.  The Transit Authority 
of River City (TARC) has provided public transportation services 
for almost 45 years to Louisville Metro/Jefferson County and 
incorporated surrounding counties: Bullitt and Oldham Counties in 
Kentucky, and Clark and Floyd Counties in Southern Indiana.  The 
Louisville region highly values the public transportation system but 
recognizes that the community is growing and will need a stronger, 
expanded multimodal transit system to support future economic 
and population growth.    Our intention is to develop a public transit 
network that is available, accessible, affordable – one that is easy to 
use for all residents across the community and the region.  Providing 
multi-modal options helps support a healthy, connected and 
sustainable city for the future.

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
• 

Increased availability and 
accessibility of public 
transportation to area 
residents.
Increased access to jobs 
systemwide.

• 

•  Decreased single-occupancy 

vehicle use to 75% and 
increased ridership to 6% by 
2035.

•  Reduced daily VMT by 500,000 

to 19.4 DVMT.
Improved safety causing 30% 
less roadway fatalities and 
serious injuries by 2035.

82%  Drive Alone
9% 
Carpool
4% 
Other Means
3%  
Transit
2%   Walk

• 

Existing modal split for How 
Louisville Gets Around Today – 
data from Move Louisville, 2016

Why is it important?
Louisville’s transportation system is heavily dependent on 
automobiles and most Louisvillians travel via single occupancy 
vehicle (SOV).  Public transportation is an essential part of the 
entire Louisville Metro infrastructure network and a critical link that 
supports resilience and community ability to respond to current and 
future mobility needs of residents.   In FY 2018, TARC served more 
than 12.5 million riders and moved more than 42,000 people on an 
average weekday.       

PARTNERS
KIPDA, Louisville Metro Government, Louisville Metro Public 
Works & Assets, Metro Parks, Kentucky Department of 
Transportation, Center for Accessible Living, Bicycling for Louisville.                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                

114

115

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWACTION 2.3.3
Increase renewable 
energy at multiple 
scales.

TIME-FRAME
5+ Years

$

FUNDING
Unfunded

OWNERS
Louisville Metro 
Develop Louisville

RELATED PLANS
Sustain Louisville 

Key Next Steps
• 

Investigate opportunities to increase the city’s capacity for 
renewable energy.  

•  Establish citywide renewable energy targets.                                                                             

Background
Louisville Metro Government aspires to foster a viable atmosphere 
for renewable energy options by leveraging public-private 
partnerships, pilot projects and grant opportunities. With support 
from the community, city government will introduce a citywide 
renewable energy goal and will review potential incentive or 
legislative options to help facilitate the process. Increasing 
renewable energy generation in Louisville not only will help achieve 
Louisville’s 80% greenhouse gas reduction target, but also will 
improve local air quality and the overall well-being of its citizens.       

                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                   

live

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
Increased use of renewable 
• 
energy technologies in city-
owned buildings.

•  Established citywide 

renewable energy and 
strategies.
Increased amount of energy 
from renewable sources.

• 

Why is it important?
Louisville’s energy is generated primarily by coal and natural gas. 
Currently, less than 3% of the city’s electricity consumption comes 
from renewable energy sources. According to the recent Special 
Report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
the impacts of climate change will be far worse than previously 
expected (IPCC, 2018). Unless we take unprecedented action 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and keep global warming 
below 1.5 degrees Celsius, we are at risk of facing long-lasting or 
irreversible consequences. Using renewable energy will help reduce 
Louisville’s greenhouse gas emissions and will be a key driver to 
limiting climate change impacts.   

PARTNERS
Louisville Sustainability Council, Louisville Energy Alliance, Greater 
Louisville Sierra Club, Louisville Gas & Electric.

116

117

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWACTION 2.3.4
Expand green infrastructure 
and spaces: Parkland and 
open space.

TIME-FRAME
5+ Years

$

FUNDING
Unfunded

OWNER
Louisville Metro Parks 
and Recreation

RELATED PLANS
Plan 2040, Louisville’s 
Comprehensive Plan

Key Next Steps
• 

Investigate funding and grant opportunities to expand parkland 
and open space.

Background

Parks improve the health of our citizens by acting as public 
gathering spaces that connect us to nature.  They improve our 
air quality, improve property values, act as a backyard for families 
without open space, and attract business.  Studies show that cities 
that make long term commitments to parks are thriving and attract 
businesses that care about the quality of life for their employees.  
Businesses are drawn to areas where employees have access to 
nature and green spaces, thus contributing to the vibrant future of 
our community.  Parks and Recreation agencies offer a variety of 
important health and wellness opportunities by providing programs 
or space to combat sedentary lifestyles and connect to nature.

                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                   

Why is it important?

The Trust for Public Land’s 2018 ParkScore index analyzed 
Louisville’s need for parkland and open space.  Their demographic 
profiles were based on 2017 Forecast block groups provided by the 
Environmental Research Systems Institute (Esri) to determine park 
need for density of youth, density of individuals in households with 
income less than 75% of city median income (in Louisville, less than 
$35,000), and population density (people per acre).  Only 33% of 
citizens within Jefferson County live within a 10-minute walk to a 
park.   The national average is 65% for comparable cities.

PARTNERS
Louisville Olmstead Parks Conservancy, Wilderness Louisville, 
21st Century Parks, U of L (Green Heart) Louisville Parks 
Foundation, Office of Sustainability, MSD, Trees Louisville, 
Louisville Grows, Nature Conservancy Brightside, Air Pollution 
Control District, Metro Council (Tree Canopy Ordinance)                                                                                                                                       
                                                        

live

• 

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
Improved natural landscapes 
• 
and reduced heat island effect.
Increased patronage of park 
users due to convenience 
of parks and increased park 
acreage.
Improved health of patrons 
riding or walking on our paths.

• 

•  Happy patrons using our 

amenities.

118

119

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWACTION 2.3.5
Expand green infrastructure 
and spaces: Metro Sewer 
District (MSD) Green 
Infrastructure Program.

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

OWNER
Louisville 
Metropolitan Sewer 
District (MSD)

RELATED PLANS
MSD Integrated 
Overflow Abatement 
Plan, MSD Green 
Design Manual, 
Urban Tree Canopy 
Assessment, Louisville 
Sustainability Plan

Key Next Steps
• 

Identify incentives for smaller green projects that extend beyond 
2020.

Background
MSD’s green infrastructure program provides stormwater 
separation and infiltration benefits that reduce overflows from 
the combined sewer system as required by the Consent Decree. 
Several committed green incentive projects through 2020 will 
fulfill these program requirements.  Louisville Metro also has an 
incentive for smaller green projects based on similar impervious 
area reduction metrics.  In addition, MSD’s urban reforestation 
program has a goal of planting 1,000 trees per year.  Ongoing 
requirements for water quality on all new developments and 
redevelopments with greater than one acre of disturbance also 
support this action of expanding of green infrastructure. These 
projects must capture, store, and/or treat the first 0.6” of rainfall 
that hits the site during a rainfall. This requirement will be in place 
for current and future development. Additional incentives from 
a variety of partners to beyond 2020 are greatly encouraged.                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                   

Why is it important?
Hard surfaces throughout Jefferson County cause more intense 
(and polluted) stormwater runoff, increased heat, and detrimental 
health impacts in Louisville Metro.  There is a need to address 
these situations through tree planting and implementation of green 
infrastructure across the County.

PARTNERS
Louisville Metro Government, Trees Louisville, Kentucky Waterways 
Alliance, The Nature Conservancy.                                                                                        

live

• 

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
• 
Included green space in new 
and re-developments.
Improved tree canopy and 
decrease in tree loss.
Increased green space and 
water quality due to decreased 
runoff and urban heat island 
effects.

• 

120

121

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWTIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

OWNERS
Louisville Metro 
Parks and Recreation 
Natural Areas Division 
and The Nature 
Conservancy 

RELATED PLANS
A feasibility study for 
the Mill Creek stream 
restoration.

ACTION 2.3.6
Expand green infrastructure 
and spaces: Mill Creek 
Greenway.

Key Next Steps
•  Enter into a 3 to 6 months conceptional planning phase and 

draft the implementation plan for Mill Creek stream restoration. 

Background
The objective of the Mill Creek project, the first action implemented 
from the Southwest Greenways Master Plan, is to create science-
based, community-supported ecological enhancement projects to 
improve forest cover, water quality, and quality of life for Louisville 
residents and downstream communities along the Ohio River. As 
such, it addresses key social and environmental determinants of 
health that contribute to inequities affecting southwest Louisville 
residents.  

The proposed project could create up to a 1,000-acre public 
natural area within the City of Louisville with up to 10 miles of 
stream and wetland restoration along Mill Creek and an adjacent 
recreational trail to connect people and nature. According to the 
feasibility study, the project would represent “one of the largest 
and most comprehensive suburban stream mitigation projects 
in the country,” and will not only improve aquatic habitat, but 
also provide a more sustainable approach to flood protection 
than the existing channel. Through a collaborative partnership, 
this project combines permanent protection of ecological 
enhancements with public recreation and environmental education 
opportunities. Ecological enhancements can include stream and 
wetland restoration through increased floodplain connectivity, 
invasive species removal, replanting with native plant species, and 
trash or debris removal. Education opportunities can include an 
outdoor classroom, interpretive signage, and opportunities for 
natural history studies that can serve area schools and educational 
programs. Recreation opportunities might include soft-surface 
pedestrian trails, a multi-use greenway and seasonal paddling or 
potentially a blueway trail system. The establishment of this area 
as a stream and wetland restoration site will provide permanent 

protection, improve stream and wetland habitat, potentially 
increase biodiversity by creating greater aquatic habitat diversity, 
improve water quality, and provide flood protection for neighboring 
communities. The simultaneous establishment of this area as a park 
will allow celebration of the natural heritage of Louisville, including 
greater awareness and appreciation of an under-utilized area and 
provide more access to greenspace and recreation opportunities, 
thus having the potential to improve health, well-being, and quality 
of life for Louisville residents. In short, the project promises both 
healthier and more resilient ecological and human communities.                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                       
Why is it important?
This initiative addresses water quality and aquatic habitat 
improvements in Mill Creek and the Ohio River downstream, 
restoration and preservation of greenspace, and a current gap 
in park access by neighboring communities. By restoring Mill 
Creek, the project may also reduce sediment and nutrient loads 
into the Ohio River and Mississippi Basin. Land use classification 
data show that the Mill Creek watershed is highly urbanized, with 
approximately 13% forest cover, 3% agriculture, and 78% urban/
suburban land use covered by impervious surfaces such as roads, 
rooftops, and driveways resulting in poor water quality and poor 
aquatic habitat and communities (Jefferson County PVA, cited in the 
2015 Louisville Urban Tree Canopy Assessment; MSD 2016 State of 
the Streams Report). The combination of impervious surfaces and 
lack of adequate forest cover contributes to poor stream quality 
and the urban heat island effect, which, particularly with a changing 
climate, can also increase flood risk. In addition, the largely publicly 
owned, forested corridor along Mill Creek represents 40% of the 
open space of the entire watershed (Jefferson County PVA land use 
classification). As highlighted in Conservation for Cities (McDonald 
2015), preservation of existing greenspace within cities is one of the 
most cost-effective ways of maintaining nature’s benefits for people 
including clean water and clean air. In addition to ecological needs, 
the project will meet the needs of the partners and collaborators.  

PARTNERS
Community members, Louisville Metro Council 
representatives, Kentucky Department of Fish and 
Wildlife Resources (KDFWR)-Stream Team, Louisville 
Metropolitan Sewer District (MSD), the South Points Scenic 
Area, consultants/designers, engineers, and biologists                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                           

live

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Created flagship park that 

promotes health and resilience 
while costing very little to 
Louisville Metro Government.

•  Permanent conservation 
protection on up to 1,000 
acres of urban land.

•  Generated stream and wetland 

• 

credits in the Salt River 
Watershed.
Increased protection of 
infrastructure by increased 
stream stability and the 
opportunity for climate 
resilient infrastructure updates. 

•  Fulfilled core objective of the 
Kentucky Urban Conservation 
program.

•  Decreased urban heat island.
• 

Increased tourism-based 
economic development in 
southwest Louisville.

122

123

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWlive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Decreased climate change 

impacts.

•  Decreased urban ambient 

temperature relative to rural 
areas.

•  No increase in the number of 
residents who are negatively 
impacted by hazards or 
extreme weather events.

$

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

OWNERS
Louisville Metro 
Develop Louisville

RELATED PLANS
Sustain Louisville 

ACTION 2.3.7
Implement strategies to 
mitigate climate change 
impacts.

Key Next Steps

•  Engage with the community to gain public input into an 

Emissions Reduction Action Plan.

Background

The Office of Sustainability will develop an Emissions Reduction 
Action Plan and a Climate Adaptation Plan that meets the Global 
Covenant of Mayors requirements and proposes data-driven actions 
to achieve Louisville’s 80 percent emissions reduction target by 
2050.   The strategies outlined in the Emission Reduction Plan 
will be based on public input and engagement with community 
members as well as results from the 2016 Community Greenhouse 
Gas (GHG) Inventory Report.  Specific strategies will include 
emissions reduction potential, health impacts, co-benefits, return of 
investment and the cost of development. The plan will be designed 
such that the collective actions positively impact all populations and 
move the city toward greater social equity.  The Climate Adaptation 
Plan will outline the intended alternations of Louisville’s systems in 
response to actual or anticipated climate change. Strategies will 
be based on climate change model projections from nationally-
recognized scientists, engagement with community members 
and information from the 2016 Louisville Metro Hazard Mitigation 
Plan. Some potential adaptation strategies may include improving 
stormwater management, investing in climate-resilient infrastructure, 
protecting air and water quality, enhancing flood control, and 
ensuring human health and safety during extreme weather events. 
This plan will emphasize solutions for vulnerable populations as they 

are typically the most at risk to the effects of climate change.  When 
implemented, Louisville Metro’s emission reduction and climate 
adaptation strategies together will ensure a community that thrives 
in the face of accelerating global changes.   
                                
Why is it important?
                                                                                                 

In 2015, Kentucky was ranked with the seventh highest energy-
related carbon dioxide emissions per capita (U.S. Energy Information 
Administration, 2018). GHG emissions trap heat in our atmosphere, 
causing regional and global temperatures to rise. Impacts of climate 
change result in damage to roads and bridges, higher energy 
costs and more extreme weather events. Regional reports indicate 
that increased heat, precipitation and drought will become more 
frequent and intense in the coming years.  If Louisville does not act 
to mitigate GHG emissions and integrate climate change adaptation 
into our planning and development goals, the impacts of a growing 
carbon footprint pose serious social, economic and environmental 
risks to the community. 

PARTNERS
Louisville Sustainability Council, Louisville Energy Alliance, 
Partnership for a Green City, University of Louisville, 
Air Pollution Control District, Louisville Climate Action 
Network, Louisville Gas & Electric, Jefferson County 
Public Schools, Center for Neighborhoods, West Jefferson 
County Community Task Force, Louisville Metro Emergency 
Management Agency, Louisville Metropolitan Sewer District                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                            

124

125

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWlive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
Increased funding to fully 
• 
implement in the CRRP risk 
areas.

•  Complied with the CRRP 

timeline.

Why is it important?

Many of Louisville’s sewer collection lines were built in the mid-
1800’s and now are at a point of repetitive failure.   Emergency 
failures are extremely costly to remedy, cause overflows, and disrupt 
the entire community eradicating Louisville’s resilience to withstand 
catastrophic flood risk.

PARTNERS
Louisville Metro Government, USACE, KDOW                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                         

ACTION 2.3.8
Address the aging  
wastewater, stormwater, 
and flood protection  
infrastructure.

TIME-FRAME
5+ Years

Key Next Steps

$

FUNDING
Unfunded

OWNERS
Louisville 
Metropolitan Sewer 
District (MSD)

RELATED PLANS
Critical Repair and 
Reinvestment Plan 
(CRRP, 2017) 

•  Develop and reprioritize annually a five-year critical repair and 

reinvestment plan.

Background
Wastewater, stormwater, and flood protection facilities throughout 
Jefferson County need repair and reinvestment in order to improve 
resilience against increased frequency of intense storms and 
protect public health and safety.   Several of Louisville’s flood pump 
stations, a part of the system that protects $23.8 billion in property, 
were constructed in the 1950’s with 1940’s technology and sized 
based on 1930’s rainfall data. In order to reduce catastrophic flood 
risks, improvements are needed at these undersized and outdated 
pump stations. Renewal of these and other aging sewer and flood 
protection facilities will support Louisville’s goals for economic 
vitality, growth, compassion, and improved resilience for vulnerable 
populations. A 5-year rolling Critical Repair and Reinvestment Plan 
(CRRP) will need to be developed and reprioritized on a fiscal year 
basis to validate projects, address gaps, and reprioritize the most 
critical infrastructure renewal efforts in a systemic way.                                 
                                                                                                 

126

127

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWVISION 03: BUILD A VIBRANT ECONOMY + PLACE 

thrive.

"We have the potential to create 
prosperity that reaches every 

neighborhood, to compete and win on the 
global stage, and set our city up for success 

for generations to come." 

State of the City, Mayor Greg Fischer

128

MAYOR'S STRATEGIC PLAN TARGETS

•  Double the number of high-wage jobs created from the 15,000 

• 

predicted growth to 30,000 by 2024.
Improve Louisville’s economic trajectory by focusing on 
professional, technical, skilled-trade and managerial jobs within 
Louisville’s five business clusters.
Improve median annual wages, adjusted for cost of living, to the 
top half of peer cities by 2020 and the top third by 2030.
•  Build upon Vision Louisville and the principles of the new 

• 

• 

comprehensive plan to support and enhance the city’s 
connectivity, health, authenticity, sustainability and equity.
Implement the Move Louisville strategic multi-modal 
transportation plan to reduce congestion, improve air 
quality, public health and safety and plan for the community’s 
transportation needs.

•  Participate in the development and preservation of 5,000 new 

and/or rehabilitated quality and affordable housing units by 
2018.

• 

Increase the number of available quality and affordable housing units by encouraging 
public-private partnerships.     

•  Decrease abandoned structures to no more than 10% of all structures within Louisville.
•  Activate Louisville through the arts and creative industries by providing programs and 

direct support across arts experiences, creative workforce, community spaces and 
neighborhoods.

•  Promote the development of a robust and equitable food system to build local and 

regional economic strengths, and create a higher quality of life and stronger identity for 
the community.

•  Make Louisville the bourbon and culinary capital of the world.
•  Rank in the top quartile of the National Recreation and Park Association (NRPA) 

performance benchmarks (21) for jurisdictions over 250,000 by 2024.

•  Achieve a customer satisfaction rate of 90% and attendance increase of 20% for Parks & 

Recreation’s program portfolio annually.

•  Strengthen and formalize Town and Gown partnerships with local universities and 

colleges to drive planning, placemaking, research and opportunities for collaboration.
•  Advance racial equity by having a Louisville Metro Government equitable workforce 

• 

throughout its breadth and hierarchy that reflects the demographics of the community.
Identify and remove racial equity barriers in the Louisville Metro Government 
procurement/contracting process.

•  Engage, train and grow youth leadership and partner with organizations that support 

youth of color to advance racial equity.  

• 

Increase economic stability, wealth building and economic development to 
address inequalities impacting individuals and families from low to median 
income status.

•  Develop robust and equitable housing options at all income levels to 

achieve a higher quality life and equitable community

129

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLE3 Goals
3.1 
Ensure Inclusive 
and Equitable 
Economic Growth 
in Historically 
Marginalized 
Communities
3.2 
Increase Individual 
Financial Stability 
and Opportunity for 
Economic Mobility

3.3 
Build Upon 
Louisville's 
Cultural Assets 

Build a Vibrant 
Economy + Place 

We recognize that a vibrant economy builds community 
wealth through equitable employment opportunities 
for all residents who are to be paid a fair-living wage. 
By intentional economic development, employment 
possibilities will reach from manufacturing to service to 
entrepreneurship, capitalizing on our food, beverage 
and healthcare industries.  We provide opportunities for 
residents to develop skill sets that promote workplace 
mobility.  Residents will experience a breadth of cultural 
opportunities by experiencing the beauty of a vibrant park 
system and a diverse expression of the arts.

Sustainable Development Goals

3.1.2

3.1.3

3.2.1

3.2.2
3.2.3
3.2.4
3.2.5
3.2.6

3.3.1
3.3.2
3.3.3
3.3.4

13 Actions 
3.1.1

Increase investment without displacement in neighborhoods impacted by historic 
discriminatory practices. 
Identify and remove barriers to racial equity in procurement and contracting 
processes. 
Advance racial equity by implementing strategies for an equitable workforce. 

Create a Louisville Mobility Lab by analyzing the barriers to economic mobility and 
fostering economic stability among population groups leading to equitable living 
conditions. 
Improve median annual wages adjusted for cost of living. 
Standardize financial literacy programing for youth. 
Increase opportunities for entrepreneurship.
Develop support services for the creation of cooperative ownership structures. 
Foster a cohesive tech ecosystem to grow tech talent.

Improve equitable access to outdoors for Louisville youth and families.
Plan, design, and build the Louisville Loop.
Increase citizen engagement and participation in the use of parks. 
Maintain a “Welcoming City”, empowering our foreign-born community and 
growing our foreign-born population.

130

131

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWAt A GlanceGOAL 3.1
Ensure Inclusive and 
Equitable Economic 
Growth in Historically 
Marginalized 
Communities

Historical policies such as Jim Crow continue to influence economic 
growth in today’s marginalized communities.  In fact, today the United 
States again faces divergence of populations after moving toward 
convergence over several decades. The factors measured include 
median household income, poverty, unemployment rates, and life 
expectancy – demonstrating a large gap between succeeding and 
struggling communities. During recent studies, it was determined 
that the distressed communities that did show upward mobility often 
times revealed a growth of populations returning to the city reflecting 
gentrification.  

Researchers also state that counties with high rates of African American 
populations tend to experience less economic mobility and that 
children living in lower income households tend to remain in lower 
income clusters creating areas of inequity across the generations.  
Economists have weighed the impact of place-based policies in contrast 
to individual-based policies noting how place-based policies such as 
housing and an “unequal education” system have created barriers to 
equality.  “Racial inequality exacerbates place-based problems and 
impedes the effectiveness of policies designed to ameliorate them"1.   

1 

www.hamiltonproject.org/papers/place_based_policies_for-shared_econom-
ic_growth

SPOTLIGHT
CHEF SPACE

Located in the historic Russell neighborhood, 
Chef Space is Louisville’s first kitchen incubator 
where food entrepreneurs can craft and sell 
their fine food creations.

West Louisville is experiencing an infusion of nearly $1 billion of investment completed, 
announced, or underway since 2014.  These investments help meet the needs of residents and 
families, increase safety and improve neighborhood amenities.  It provides an attractive place 
to do business.  Louisville Metro Government is committed to the coordinated investments, 
resources and strategies that will be a part of ongoing sustainable efforts to revitalize West 
Louisville.1

Redlining is the denial of services or the refusal to grant loans or insurance to certain neighborhoods 
based on racial and socioeconomic discrimination. This map was created through independent research 
by Joshua Poe, a local urban planner.   

1 

West Louisville Strategies for Success

132

133

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWthrive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Ensured that the majority of 
residents experience stable 
living in their neighborhood of 
choice.

•  Ensured that neighborhood 

environments are revitalized to 
reflect history and culture. 

ACTION 3.1.1
Increase investment 
without displacement in 
neighborhoods impacted 
by historic discriminatory 
practices.

Key Next Steps
•  Convene partners to identify potential strategies.

Background
Louisville will pursue a collection of local and state policy changes 
that support incumbent residents and businesses.  Additional 
financial sources will be identified to encourage investment activity 
that does not displace incumbent residents and businesses.     

                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                   

TIME-FRAME
0-1 Year

$

FUNDING
Unfunded

OWNER 
Louisville Metro 
Government Office of 
Equity and Louisville 
Forward

RELATED PLANS
Housing Needs 
Assessment, Redlining 
Louisville, Vision 
Russell, Lean Into 
Louisville, Property 
Valuation Assessment 
(PVA) 2019 Assessment 
Data

Why is it important?
Louisville is experiencing an unprecedented period of new 
investment, and significant new dollars are now flowing into 
historically disinvested areas of our city.  How do we ensure that 
residents and businesses are the beneficiaries of new investment 
and not displaced?

PARTNERS
Louisville Urban League, Russell: A Place of Promise, LHOME, 
REBOUND, New Directions, River City Housing, HPI, Youth Build, 
Metro United Way, Louisville Central Community Centers (LCCC), 
Interdenominational Ministerial Coalition (IMC), Concerned 
Pastors of Russell (CPR), Small Business Resource Group – LIBA/
SBDC/SBA/Navigate/Community Ventures, One West, Black 
Lives Matter, Louisville Metro Government – Office of Resilience 
and Community Services, Center for Health Equity, other 
Metro agencies, Louisville Metro Housing Authority (LMHA), 
KentuckianaWorks, Property Valuation Administrator (PVA)                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                   

134

135

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROW$

TIME-FRAME
0-5 Years

FUNDING
Fully Funded

OWNERS
Louisville Metro 
Office of Equity

ACTION 3.1.2
Identify and remove 
barriers to racial equity 
in procurement and 
contracting processes.

Key Next Steps
•  Form a procurement and diversity cross-functional team.  
•  Hold monthly cross-functional team meetings. 
•  Review the number of policy and standard operation procedures 

and practice changes implemented.

Background

The purpose of this project is to review Louisville Metro Government 
Purchasing Policies and Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) in 
order to solve problems identified in surveys of minority businesses 
in this community and to put forth good faith efforts to identify and 
remove racial equity barriers in the procurement and contracting 
process and procedures.  The success of this project will make it 
easier for minority businesses to conduct business with Louisville 
Metro Government and ensure that procurement and contracting 
resources benefit the entire community it serves and proportionate 
to the community demographics.  In advance of this effort, progress 
will be communicated to minority businesses, certain contracts will 
be unbundled, and compliance and monitoring will be enhanced.                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                             

thrive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
• 

Increased percentage of 
government spending 
allocated to minority business 
through contract procurement.

Why is it important?
Minority contractors are not receiving proportional benefits from 
Louisville Metro Government purchasing and procurement processes 
nor are they proportional to the community demographic.

PARTNERS
Office of Equity, Human Relations Commission, Office of 
Performance Improvement, Louisville Forward, Office of 
Procurement, Office of Management and Budget. Potential partners 
include:  Kentuckiana Minority Business Council, Tri-state Minority 
Supplier Development Council, Kentucky Diversity Chamber of 
Commerce                                        

136

137

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWACTION 3.1.3
Advance racial equity by 
implementing strategies 
for an equitable 
workforce.

Key Next Steps
•  Review Louisville Metro Government’s personnel policy through 

the Racial Equity Toolkit to ensure that the personnel policy is 
updated and improves racial equity.  

•  Review job descriptions by race and gender for each 

department, including performance evaluations, career paths, 
and professional initiatives.  

•  Report percentages of persons of color promoted and salary 

distribution in leadership positions.

Background
Louisville Metro Government (LMG) is required to have a workforce 
that mirrors the community demographics. To reach this goal and 
ensure proper recruitment, workforce development and retention, 
LMG will conduct a comprehensive review of policies and practices 
through an equity lens.       

                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                   

TIME-FRAME
0-1 Year

FUNDING
Fully Funded

$

OWNER
Louisville Office of 
Equity

RELATED PLANS
Affirmative Action Plan 
and Title VI

thrive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Created and implemented an 

Affirmative Action Plan and 
Title VI for Louisville Metro 
Government. 

•  Prohibited discrimination on 
the basis of race, color, and 
national origin in any program 
or activity that receives federal 
funds or other federal financial 
assistance.

•  Ensured equitable hiring 

practices that eliminates racial 
and gender biases by de-
identifying applicants to the 
greatest extent possible.

Why is it important?
LMG must conduct a comprehensive review of its employment 
policies and practices to ensure an equitable workforce throughout 
its breadth and hierarchy that reflects the demographics of the 
community. 

PARTNERS
Human Relations Commission, Office of Performance 
Improvement, Louisville Forward, Office of Management 
and Budget, Human Resources and all other Louisville 
Metro Government departments and agencies.                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                          

138

139

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWGOAL 3.2
Increase Individual 
Financial Stability 
and Opportunity for 
Economic Mobility

Economic mobility is the ability to improve an individual’s or family’s 
economic status and usually is measured by income.  Key findings 
from The Pew Center on the Economic Mobility of the States study 
found that Kentucky is one of nine southern states that consistently 
experiences less upward mobility and greater downward mobility 
compared to the nation as a whole. The average hourly wage in 
Louisville (May 2017) was $21.68 which is approximately 11% below 
the national average and Louisville’s minimum wage is $9 higher 
than the state rate of $7.25.  Researchers correlate education with 
economic mobility and find education as the key to eliminating 
disparities.  One key finding is that "increases in parent education 
lead to better educational outcomes of children, especially reducing 
the probability of very low achievement [and that] job training for 
adults appears to have effects that may enhance both absolute and 
relative mobility within and across the generations,” (Pew Charitable 
Trust, Economic Mobility Project).    

SPOTLIGHT
LOUISVILLE URBAN LEAGUE EXPUNGEMENT 

Criminal records prevent hundreds of thousands of 
Kentuckians from fully re-entering the community 
and rebuild their lives.  With the help of a 
$300,000 donation, the Louisville Urban League is 
working with locals to expunge their records.

A living wage is the amount of income for a household to live above poverty 
and determines the quality of an individual’s life. While often thought of 
as minimum wage, the living wage takes into consideration the actual cost 
of living.  A living wage should cover the expense of leading a healthy life 
including payment for shelter, medical costs, food and transportation.  
These costs vary according to where someone lives indicating that the 
amount of a living wage varies region to region.1  

Based on the MIT Living Wage Calculator, two thirds of working 
households in Louisville earned a living wage in 2016 that was 
enough to cover a basic level of living expenses such as food, 
childcare, healthcare, transportation, and taxes. The remaining 
third of households relied on government assistance; aid from 
nonprofits, friends, or family; or did not comfortably meet their 
basic needs. In a two-parent, two-child households, each parent 
would to earn $15.50 an hour working full-time to comfortably 
meet their basic needs.

Source: GPL analysis of American Community Survey Micro-data 
and MIT Living Wage Calculator data. 

In 2016, 
one third of 
working households 
in Louisville did not 
earn a living wage 
in 2016 that was 
enough to cover a 
basic level of living 
expenses. 

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%

$ 22.9k

I

I

 

 

E
G
A
W
G
N
V
I
L
 
A
G
N
N
R
A
E
E
G
A
T
N
E
C
R
E
P

 

48.9k 59.3k 77.1k

37.8k 52.6k 65.9k 78.5k

LIVING WAGE

140

Data source: "From Data to Action: 15 Years Beyond Merger", 2018, by The Greater Louisville Project

1 

Living Wage and How it Compares to the Minimum Wage https://www.thebalance.
com/living-wage-3305771

141

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWTIME-FRAME
1-5 Years 

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

OWNER
Louisville Metro 
Office of Resilience 
and Community 
Services.

ACTION 3.2.1
Create a Louisville Economic 
Mobility Lab by analyzing the 
barriers to economic mobility 
and fostering economic stability 
among population groups 
leading to equitable living 
conditions.

Key Next Steps

• 

• 

Lay the groundwork for establishing Louisville’s Economic 
Mobility Lab by convening partners to establish a work plan and 
timeline.  
Identify and address barriers that affect economic mobility for 
Louisville residents and perform research and in-depth analysis 
of pertinent factors that inhibit economic mobility. 

Background
Prioritized strategies in Louisville’s current city plan include 
addressing issues of economic stability, inequity and increasing 
opportunities for building wealth. Louisville hosts a network of 
financial empowerment champions who work tirelessly to increase 
economic opportunity for all; however, economic security and 
prosperity inequities remain unresolved. The Louisville Economic 
Mobility Lab or "The Lab"will explore the barriers to economic 
security and advancement in our city and analyze what keeps 
low-moderate income Louisvillians from reaching financial stability 
that increases their financial independence.  The Economic 
Mobility Lab will analyze city services, policies and programs that 
address economic stability to determine service and intervention 
effectiveness in terms of moving individuals toward stability and 
independence. Leveraging existing networks and partnerships, 
the Lab will work with non-profits, financial institutions, universities 
and other governmental entities to analyze demographic and 
geographic data to better understand barriers to economic mobility 
in the city. The Lab will explore data from existing networks and 
partners: Bank On Louisville (an engine to collaboratively strengthen 
the community’s economic well-being through improved access to 
mainstream financial education and services); the Louisville Alliance 

thrive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Recommendations to inform 

interventions and support 
upward economic mobility. 

Campaign from Bank On Louisville

for Development through Diversity, Empowerment and Resources 
(LADDER - a collaborative working to create a community-wide 
culture of financial inclusiveness and accessibility); the Louisville 
Asset Building Coalition (LABC – a broad public/private collaborative 
dedicated to asset building for individuals and families); the Louisville 
Community Financial Empowerment Network (LCFEN – a network 
of collaborative agencies, organizations and businesses committed 
to driving innovation in the asset building arena and improving the 
ability and confidence of the entire Louisville community to improve 
financial capability and resilience); Neighborhood Place (works 
with the Louisville community to provide blended and accessible 
health, education, employment and human services that support 
children and families in their progress toward self-sufficiency); the 
Louisville Financial Empowerment Provider Network (FEPN – a 
network of community partners advancing financial education); 
Louisville Metro Outreach and Advocacy Offices (Office for Women, 
Office for Veterans, Office of Aging and Disabled Citizens). Using a 
data driven approach, the Economic Mobility Lab will research and 
develop program and policy recommendations that support and 
promote economic mobility. Recommendations may be changes 
to existing programs and approaches as well as innovative efforts 
to pilot. Future efforts of the Lab may include piloting innovative 
interventions, scaling successful efforts and seeking funding.                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                 

Why is it important?
Too many Louisvillians lack the economic resources and opportunities 
to reach financial stability and prosperity. This is even more true for 
individuals and households of color in our community. According 
to the 2019 Scorecard released by Prosperity Now, 12.6% of 
households in Louisville have income below the federal poverty 
threshold and this rate is 3.1x higher for households of color; 
unemployment rate for Louisville is 6.3% and 2.4x higher for workers 
of color.  Approximately 40% of Louisville households are liquid asset 
poor which is higher than the national rate of 36.8%.   

PARTNERS
Bank On Louisville, Louisville Community Financial Empowerment 
Network; Louisville Alliance for Development through Diversity, 
Empowerment and Resources; Louisville Asset Building Coalition; 
Louisville Financial Empowerment Provider Network; Neighborhood 
Place

142

143

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWACTION 3.2.2
Improve median annual 
wages adjusted for cost 
of living. 

TIME-FRAME
5+ Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

Key Next Steps
•  Collaborate with Louisville’s five business clusters - business 
services and IT, advanced manufacturing, lifelong wellness & 
aging care, logistics & eCommerce, and food and beverage – to 
grow high wage jobs. 

•  Develop a comprehensive promise scholarship program. 

OWNERS
Louisville Forward / 
Economic 
Development

RELATED PLANS
Mayor’s Strategic 
Plan, Department of 
Economic Development 
Strategic Plan, 
Advantage Louisville 
(GLI)

Background

Since the Mayor’s initial strategic plan published in 2012, Louisville 
Metro has been focused on raising wages; the current form of this 
goal was updated in 2014.  Multiple strategies encompassing near- 
and long-term solutions are underway.  Creating a more educated 
workforce is fundamental to increasing wages and ultimately a 
higher quality of life for Louisvillians.  Economic development 
focuses daily on growing high-wage jobs in the professional, 
technical, skilled trade, and managerial sectors within Louisville's 
five business clusters to improve Louisville's economic trajectory 
towards greater opportunity, prosperity and competitiveness for all 
residents.       

                                                                                                                                                      

thrive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Worked toward 51,000 more 

people with median wages 
higher than the 2018 median 
wage by 2030.

•  Doubled the number of 

professional, technical, and 
managerial jobs since 2014 by 
2024.  

Why is it important?

Louisville’s annual average wage last matched the national annual 
average in 1984.  Wages have recovered and made progress back 
towards the national average during this economic recovery period, 
but still lags behind. We are using median wages for this metric 
because medians capture a broader swath of the population and are 
not bolstered by gains among top earners only. Likewise, we chose 
to adjust for cost of living to account for any cost of living increases 
that might counter wage gains.  

PARTNERS
Louisville Forward, KentuckianaWorks, Greater Louisville, Inc., 
EVOLVE 502

2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0

2014-2018

BUSINESS 
SERVICES 

& IT

ADVANCED

MANUFACTURING

LIFELONG 
WELLBEING & 
AGING CARE 

LOGISTICS & 
ECOMMERCE 

LOUISVILLE CLUSTER TARGETS VS. GROWTH 

144

145

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROW$

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Fully Funded

OWNER
Bank of Louisville 

ACTION 3.2.3
Standardize financial 
literacy programming for 
youth. 

Key Next Steps

•  Create a revised curriculum.  
•  Educate the Financial Empowerment Planning Network on the 

curriculum.  

Background
According to the U.S. Department of Treasury, individuals who 
receive personal finance education have higher rates of savings, 
make bigger contributions to their retirement accounts and have 
a higher net worth. Using the National Standards in K-12 Personal 
Finance Education published by the Jump$tart Coalition for 
Personal Financial Literacy, the financial education incorporated 
in the KY Academic Standards for Vocational Studies, and the 
Financial Literacy (9-12) Standards activated by HB 132, Bank On 
Louisville will work to revise and align the “Start Smart!” youth 
financial education curriculum to compliment these standards and 
advance the use of this curriculum through community education 
providers and partners.  Bank on Louisville (BOL) is a collaborative 
engine, led by Louisville Metro, that strengthens the community’s 
economic well-being through improved access to mainstream 
financial education and services and is an active coalition since 
2010.  BOL recognizes the need to educate youth in financial 
literacy and helps support youth financial education efforts through 
the Financial Empowerment Provider Network (FEPN) – a strong 
network of community partners who deliver financial education 
throughout our community. “Start Smart!” is a BOL signature 
product for youth financial literacy.  Through the FEPN, BOL 
will train local service providers on the facilitation of this revised 

thrive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
Increased number of trainers 
• 
that use the revised version of 
Start Smart! curriculum.
Increased in number of 
Louisville agencies that have 
developed skill sets to deliver 
the curriculum.

• 

curriculum that compliments and prepares young people for the 
Kentucky Academic Standards of financial literacy and support 
facilitation across providers. Using the Start Smart! curriculum, 
these service providers will provide education opportunities for 
youth across our community.  This financial literacy curriculum will 
reach youth engaged in the Mayor’s SummerWorks program that 
engages young people in summer employment opportunities. It will 
also reach youth and families engaged in the Louisville Children’s 
Savings Account program in the Russell neighborhood. This program 
provides seed funding for college savings and will employ a two-
generational approach to financial literacy as a program component.                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                   

Why is it important?
Financial literacy statistics demonstrate that most people do not 
possess the financial expertise needed to make healthy financial 
choices - resulting in a financial illiteracy epidemic.  In the absence of 
financial education for children, children may face significant financial 
challenges in adulthood. Financial problems are a leading cause of 
poverty, stress, relationship difficulties, and depression. Youth need 
quality financial literacy during in and out-of-school time to prepare 
them for financial success in adulthood.   

PARTNERS
Members of the Financial Empowerment Provider Network (FEPN)                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                        

146

147

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWACTION 3.2.4
Increase opportunities 
for entrepreneurship.

TIME-FRAME
0 to 1 Year

FUNDING
Partially Funded 

$

Key Next Steps
•  Train all Louisville Metro Government service providers to utilize 

Lean Business Model Canvas.  

•  Convene an event that includes resource providers chamber and 

association executives and boards to better connect with small 
businesses.

OWNERS
Louisville Forward/
Economic 
Development 

RELATED PLANS
Network of small 
business resource 
partners, business 
associations, chambers 
and Metro Council 
offices.

Background
The Louisville Forward Small Business Development team helps 
entrepreneurs start and grow small businesses by offering technical 
assistance, facilitating referrals to other small business resource 
providers, and administering regular workshops (e.g. Exploring 
Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneurship Fundamentals) and 
industry-specific workshops (e.g. Etsy Craft Entrepreneurship and 
Entrée-preneurship programs). Through personalized attention and 
assistance, an entrepreneur can get connected to the resources they 
need for success.       

                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                   

thrive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
Improved inclusive access to 
• 
small business support services 
by building relationships with 
organizations that work with 
underserved communities, 
including minorities and 
immigrants.

•  Created events to convene 
diverse entrepreneurs and 
business owners to build 
networks that underserved 
communities.

•  Facilitated mentoring 

opportunities and activities in 
west and south Louisville.

Why is it important?
According to U.S. Small Business Administration, more than half of 
small businesses close within three years of opening. Many aspiring 
entrepreneurs or business owners are not aware of the available 
services or where to go for technical assistance when starting a 
business. To address these problems, Louisville has developed a 
robust system of small business support. 

PARTNERS
Louisville Metro Government - Louisville Forward and Office 
of Resilience and Community Services, Access Ventures, 
Kiva, Navigate Enterprise Center, Canopy, Smoketown 
Hopebox, Community Ventures, KentuckianaWorks                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                  

148

149

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWthrive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Created and initiated 

supportive services framework 
for cooperative businesses.

•  Engaged partner organizations 

provide services.

•  Three services to support the 
development of cooperative 
ownership structures within 
the first five years at work.

ACTION 3.2.5
Develop support services for 
the creation of cooperative 
ownership structures. 

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

$

FUNDING
Unfunded 

OWNER
Louisville Forward

RELATED PLANS
Vision Russell, METCO 
loan program, 
Microenterprise 
program, Russell:  A 
Place of Promise 
framework

Key Next Steps
• 

Identify and launch new technical resources and tools to support 
the formation of new cooperatives and the conversion of 
existing local businesses to cooperative form. 

Background

Louisville residents are increasingly interested in supporting 
the development of new cooperative businesses, particularly 
in neighborhoods that have suffered from a lack of small 
businesses due to the impact of policies that stripped wealth 
and access to capital from residents. Louisville also is known for 
its concentration of locally-owned businesses, many of which 
are owned by individuals who lack a clear succession plan. 
Cooperative businesses are critical to community economic 
resilience, particularly in neighborhoods that have been 
impacted by racist policies and practices that limited access to 
capital and led to a loss of ownership of homes and businesses.                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                    

Why is it important?

Cooperatives often served markets that were ignored by traditional 
businesses because they were deemed less profitable and provided 
opportunities not only for employment but for employee ownership. 
Cooperatives tend to be longer-lived, return more dollars to the 
local economy, and pay higher wages than comparable traditional 
businesses.1 Local interest in cooperatives is growing in Louisville, 
both for the creation of new cooperative businesses and the 
conversion of existing local businesses to cooperative form as 
a succession planning tool. This action will support the creation 
of technical resources to help the growth of a new cooperative 
business ecosystem. 

PARTNERS
One West, Russell: A Place of Promise, Resilience and Community 
Services, Louisville Independent Business Alliance, University 
of Louisville College of Business and its Family Business Center                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                    

150

151

1 

https://community-wealth.org/content/benefits-and-impact-cooperatives

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWTIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

OWNER
Louisville Forward

RELATED PLANS
Tech Talent Louisville 

ACTION 3.2.6
Foster a cohesive tech 
ecosystem to grow tech 
talent.

Key Next Steps

•  Work with key stakeholders to determine where new tech 

programs can be created.  

•  Determine how existing tech programs can be maximized. 

Background
Louisville is currently working to create an integrated, cohesive 
tech ecosystem, where all parties know what is needed and 
what they can do to help. Specifically, the city is working with 
Jefferson County Public Schools, the University of Louisville, 
the University of Kentucky, Jefferson Community & Technical 
College, Bellarmine University, Indiana University—Southeast, 
Ivy Tech—Sellersburg, the Code Louisville program run by 
local workforce board KentuckianaWorks and its new spin-off 
Tech Louisville, the Louisville Tech Alliance, Greater Louisville 
Inc. (the area chamber of commerce), and potential third-
party education providers to see where new programs can be 
created and existing programs can be maximized to produce 
five times more tech talent than the city is currently producing.                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                              

thrive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Enhanced a public-school 

system where every student 
is grounded in digital literacy 
and have opportunities to 
pursue tech-related careers 
and experiences by 2020.

•  Graduated 900 students per 
year with a computer-related 
degree from institutions of 
higher educational by 2023.   
•  Graduated 700 students per 
year with a computer-related 
degree or credential from 
short-term training programs 
or 2-year higher education 
institutions by 2023.

Why is it important?

To compete in the global 21st century economy, Louisville needs 
to dramatically grow its tech workforce.  Today, we have about 75% 
of the tech jobs we should have based on national averages.  By 
quintupling our projected tech job growth over the next 4 years, we 
can reach a level closer to the national average. 

PARTNERS
Louisville Forward/Economic Development, KentuckianaWorks, 
GLI, the entire P-20 education system, private/proprietary 
training providers, employers, Louisville Tech Alliance                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                         

152

153

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWGOAL 3.3
Build Upon 
Louisville's 
Cultural Assets 

The definition of a cultural asset is something that has value because 
of its contribution to a community's creativity, knowledge, traditions, 
culture, meaning, and vitality. They can be the places you visit 
to express your cultural identity, and/or the resources one uses 
to pursue a creative practice.  Louisville is a welcoming city that 
celebrates the different cultures that make-up its population.  Arts 
and culture are alive across the region, from downtown venues to 
neighborhood parks and libraries.  It is a city that resonates with the 
arts in the form of orchestra, ballet, opera, regional and children’s 
theatre as well as a breadth of museums – from art to history to 
sports.    Louisville’s arts and culture define its authenticity and 
recognizes that every child and every adult benefit from equitable 
accessibility.  

SPOTLIGHT
THE BIG TABLE 

The Big Table creates engaging spaces 
for the community to encounter one 
another and connect through meaningful 
conversation. From our annual giant potluck 
with over 1,500 participants to smaller 
conversations around sensitive topics, The 
Big Table aims to help our community 
become more interconnected and develop 
our collective capacity to discuss important 
issues. 

154

“Arts and culture have the power to transform the region, to help advance 
a more competitive, economically stronger, more educated, creative and 
compassionate Greater Louisville. Arts and culture are alive across the 
region, from downtown venues to neighborhood parks, libraries, schools 
and community centers.”1   

1 

Imagine Greater Louisville 2020.  An arts and culture vision to transform the region.

$326

MILLION

IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY 

GENERATED BY THE 
ARTS AND CULTURE 

SECTOR IN 2016

PARTICIPATION 
FROM EVERY 
ZIP CODE IN 
THE REGION

NEARLY EVERY STATE IN 
THE U.S. AND DOZENS 

OF COUNTRIES

6 Million

ESTIMATED 
ATTENDANCE 

AT ARTS AND 

CULTURE VENUES 

1,700

CREATIVE 
BUSINESSES 

78

MUSEUMS

1,800

ARTISTS

+

LIVING AND WORKING 

IN OUR 

COMMUNITY

472

ARTS AND CULTURE 

VENUES AND 
ESTABLISHMENTS

459

HISTORICAL

SITES  

Data source: "Imagine Greater Louisville 2020: An Arts and Culture Vision to Transform the Region", 2017, by Imagine Greater 
Louisville 2020

BOTH NONPROFIT AND 

FOR-PROFIT

155

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWthrive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
• 

Increased parental 
engagement in creating 
opportunities in nature for 
youth.
Improved health and academic 
performance of youth.

• 

•  Developed Shawnee Outdoor 
Learning Center to benefit the 
west Louisville and beyond 
residents.  

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

OWNERS
Louisville Metro Parks 
Natural Areas Division

RELATED PLANS
West Louisville Outdoor 
Recreation Initiative 
Master Plan, Cities 
Connecting Children to 
Nature 

ACTION 3.3.1
Improve equitable access to 
the outdoors for Louisville 
youth and families. 

Key Next Steps

•  Build capacity to implement community programs through 

private fundraising.  

•  Build capacity of West Louisville residents to ensure guidance 

during the implementation phase of the West Louisville Outdoor 
Recreation Initiative. 

•  Encourage community participation in equity and environmental 

justice. 

•  Fully implement a program data system to track, support and 

improve community outreach.

Background

Louisville is committed to be a resilient city, one that creates a 
culture of equity, compassion and trust to address structures and 
systems preventing residents from achieving their full human 
potential. Building upon community engagement, Louisville will 
be a city where every resident has opportunities to thrive including 
the opportunity to experience the beauty of vibrant natural spaces.  
Louisville Metro Parks and Recreation, through its Natural Areas 
Division, works to increase equitable access to nature in Louisville 
and address the social determinants of health by expanding 
environmental education and outdoor recreation programming 
within underserved communities, including communities of color 
in West Louisville.  This program, Louisville is Engaging Children 
in the Outdoors (“Louisville ECHO”) began as an effort to provide 
4th grade students at neighborhood Title I public elementary 
schools with inquiry-based visits to their local parks, the Jefferson 
Memorial Forest (Louisville’s large park and urban forest), and the 
Red River Gorge in the Daniel Boone National Forest. Louisville 

ECHO expanded, steadily becoming a holistic, multi-partner initiative 
creating “cradle to career” access to nature and greenspace for 
nearly 2,500 youth through complementary age-appropriate activities 
including nature play, school field trips, Out-Of-School Time (OST) 
outdoor recreational programming and summer youth employment 
serving ages 3 to 21. Louisville ECHO is the programming 
component of the West Louisville Outdoor Recreation Initiative 
(WLORI) which is a conceptual master plan guiding expansion of 
outdoor recreation infrastructure in parks adjoining the Ohio River, 
including Chickasaw and Shawnee Parks.  Proposed infrastructure 
includes: green infrastructure for improved water quality and 
educational programming; soft-surface trails for hiking and biking; 
boating, canoeing, and fishing access to neighborhood waterbodies; 
and areas for nature play. WLORI calls for construction of a regional 
facility, the Shawnee Outdoor Learning Center, in Shawnee Park 
to serve as a base for expanding Louisville ECHO programming 
and creating a new generation of park users who are exploring 
and advocating for natural spaces in their backyard and beyond.                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                
Why is it important?
Researchers and other sources support the premise that connecting 
people to nature improves physical and mental health and increases 
social cohesion.  Furthermore, Louisville has identified the social 
determinants of health including the environmental quality, the built 
environment, education and jobs opportunities impacted by access 
to nature that must be addressed to improve community health 
outcomes.  

PARTNERS
Metro Center for Health Equity; Mayor’s SummerWorks Initiative, 
YouthBuild, Cities Connecting Children to Nature Initiative from 
the National League of Cities and Children & Nature Networks, 
Metro Parks Community Centers, JCPS Young, Portland, Coral 
Ridge, King elementary schools, Louisville Metropolitan Sewer 
District, West Louisville Outdoor Recreation Initiative (WLORI) 
community council, Wilderness Louisville, Aetna Foundation                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                             

156

157

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWTIME-FRAME
Immediate

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

OWNERS
Louisville Metro 
Public Works, 
Transportation 
Division, Trails and 
Greenways Office

RELATED PLANS
2013 Louisville Loop 
Master Plan 

ACTION 3.3.2
Plan, design, and build 
the Louisville Loop. 

Key Next Steps
•  Plan and design the Louisville Loop segments

Background
The Louisville Loop is a perimeter 100+ mile shared use path system 
intended to circumnavigate the whole of Louisville Metro - along 
the entire length of the Ohio River from the northeast to the south-
west... along Pond Creek eastward via McNeely Lake Park to Floyds 
Fork...northeastward along Floyds Fork to Middletown…and back 
to the Ohio River via Anchorage and Prospect. The Louisville Loop 
should be developed as a special recreational feature which could 
include public art and an interpretive program designed to reveal 
the natural and cultural history of the county. It also will incorporate 
varying types and intensity of human use, including trails for passive 
recreation and alternative transportation.  This deep reach into 
the community has been the focus of the project’s principles and 
approach to:  
• 

Improve mobility for non-motorized travel for pedestrians, 
bicyclists, transit users and equestrians;

•  Connect neighborhoods, schools, parks, workplaces and 

shopping areas to the Loop;

•  Encourage a wide range of users including families, children, 
people with disabilities, and athletes to improve health and 
fitness;

•  Celebrate the natural and cultural history of Louisville; 
•  Enrich our lives with public art;  
•  Serve as a catalyst for economic development by increasing 

property values near the Loop, encouraging tourism and 
providing amenities for neighborhoods and workplaces near the 
trail; and

thrive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Constructed Louisville Loop 

McNeely Lake Park Trail 
segment by 2022.

•  Designed and Constructed 
the Lewis & Clark Bridge to 
Prospect Trail by 2022. 

•  Constructed Louisville Loop 
Jefferson Memorial Forest 
Medora – Dodge Gap – Pond 
Creek Trail segments by 2024.
•  Constructed Louisville Loop 
Middletown – Eastwood Trail 
segment by 2025.

•  146,000 Louisville residents 

with access to four newly 
constructed segments of the 
Louisville Loop. 

•  Be an essential component for the growth and prosperity of the 
Region. A critical element to its success will be the coordination 
of many public agencies and private partners to assure the 
mission and vision of the Loop.

Why is it important?
The Loop is conceived primarily as an off-road shared-use path that 
does and will meander through the community, often parallel¬ing 
a stream, the Ohio River, a road, or natural area. The Loop has 
the potential to incorporate many best practices of sustain¬able 
communities and fulfill the mission to connect people to a greener 
and healthier community. It will distinguish Louisville as one of 
the nation’s most livable cities through using green infrastructure, 
shared-use trails, active transportation systems, and safe and vibrant 
neighborhood districts. These are best practices employed by many 
of the more desirable and livable cities in the United States: Denver, 
Indianapolis, Port¬land, Minneapolis, Raleigh, and Charlotte. These 
cities have elevated the quality of life for their residents and provide 
a tool to attract economic investment and tourism dollars and the 
new economy and chronic health issues require cities to invest in 
these resources. Louisville is primed to be among the best cities 
through the Louisville Loop project.  When completed, the Louisville 
Loop will pass within a mile of most of the population and connect 
directly to some of the largest employment centers in the county.   

PARTNERS
Louisville Mayor’s Office, Louisville Metro Council, Louisville Parks 
& Recreation, Louisville Forward, Louisville Metro Public Health 
& Wellness, Louisville Metro Police Department, Louisville Metro 
Planning & Design Services, Louisville Metro Fire & Rescue, 
Louisville MetroSafe, Louisville Metropolitan Sewer District, 
Kentucky Transportation Cabinet - District 5, Kentuckiana Planning 
and Development Agency, U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, 
Transit Authority of River City, Louisville Downtown Development 
Corporation, Waterfront Development Corporation, Olmsted Parks 
Conservancy, 21st Century Parks/Parklands of Floyds Fork, 
University of Louisville, Louisville Water Company, Louisville Gas & 
Electric, City of Prospect; City of Middletown                                                                                                         

158

159

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWthrive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  A richer outdoor environment 

because of on-going 
maintenance and programing, 
tree plantings, and outreach to 
residents. 
Increased volunteer hours.

• 
•  Dedicated funding stream for 

maintenance activities.

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

$

FUNDING
Unfunded

OWNER
Louisville Metro Parks 
and Recreation

ACTION 3.3.3
Increase citizen 
engagement and 
participation in the use 
of parks.

Key Next Steps
• 

Identify a dedicated income stream for park maintenance and 
programming.  

•  Expand public education on the tree canopy and environmental 

needs. 
Increase volunteer participation.

• 

Background
Metro Parks staff members work to increase participation in 
Louisville’s park system, understanding the ability of nature to 
improve the quality of life and provide a sustainable and enjoyable 
environment to relax, attend events, exercise and simply play.  
Staff strive to make the park system the community’s backyard 
for all residents and visitors to enjoy.  As participation increases 
in Louisville’s park system, Metro Parks will explore expanding 
programming to the general public.  In addition to encouraging 
the public to play in our parks, we will encourage them to be 
vested in the enhancement of our system by volunteering their 
time or donating to the maintenance of our parks or a special 
cause.  In the current economy, volunteers, both corporate and 
individual, make the difference in how our parks look and what 
programs are offered.  Corporate volunteers enhance the look 
of our parks and facilities by offering entire days of assistance 
with maintenance activities.  Individuals contribute to the 
enhancement of our trails, invasive plant removal, educating 
visitors and tutoring our youth.  Donations and grants from 
groups sponsor youth environmental and athletic programming, 
while enhancing the facilities where we offer these programs.                                                                                                                                        
The general public is not fully aware of all park locations, programs 

Why is it important?

or activities within the metro area.  Our goal is to inform citizens on 
how the park systems contributes to the quality of life and the need 
for additional resources to maintain these areas.  

PARTNERS
Louisville Olmsted Parks Conservancy, Wilderness 
Louisville, Louisville Parks Foundation, 21st Century Parks.                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                        

160

161

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWthrive

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Growth of foreign-born 

populations.
Increased immigrant 
community leaders.

• 

•  Functioning business 

associations operating in 
Hispanic, Somali, Bhutanese, 
Vietnamese and African 
communities. 

•  Maintained Louisville’s 

designation as a Welcoming 
Certified city under the 
standards established by 
Welcoming America.

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

$

FUNDING
Unfunded

OWNER
Louisville Metro 
Government and 
Greater Louisville Inc. 
(under the initiative 
Global Louisville)

ACTION 3.3.4
Maintain a “Welcoming 
City”, empowering our 
foreign-born community 
and growing our foreign-
born population.

Key Next Steps
•  Build community leadership capacity.  
•  Realign and deploy language services in Louisville Metro 

• 

Government. 
Increase the number of immigrant business associations and 
chambers in Louisville Metro.

Background
In May 2015, Louisville Metro Government and Greater Louisville 
Inc., the Metro Chamber of Commerce, announced Global 
Louisville, an initiative to engage the community in creating a 
strategic and action-oriented framework to welcome immigrants into 
our community to advance economic, community educational and 
cultural opportunities that benefit everyone. Working with partners 
from the social service, education, government and business 
sectors, Global Louisville convened meetings and interviews to learn 
how our immigrant communities arrive into the region, discover 
how they are supported as they integrate into the community, 
measure their impact on regional growth, and identify areas where 
additional support or new strategies are needed to enhance their 
development. This Global Louisville Action Plan establishes a 
shared baseline of knowledge about our foreign-born residents and 
identifies recommended actions to accelerate the attraction of new 
foreign-born immigrants and streamlines resources and services that 
assist them with achieving their highest potential in our community. 

It puts ‘welcome into action’ with specific steps to jumpstart foreign-
born entrepreneurship, assist job-seekers, inform communities, 
celebrate cultures, train community leaders, and get the word out to 
those seeking the great quality of life that Louisville provides. The 
plan strives to use available community resources and complements 
other initiatives that seek to improve the lives of all residents in the 
region.                                                                                                                                   

Why is it important?
Foreign-born Louisville residents have been an increasingly strong 
source of our population growth since 1990. Current projections 
show that they represent a significant portion of our future growth—
filling jobs, building businesses, and infusing our region with a 
vibrant and diverse culture attractive to others seeking a great place 
to live and work. International diversity builds global competitiveness 
and makes our community more resilient to changes in the world. It 
is important to put in place deliberate strategies and initiatives that 
welcome and support newcomers to Louisville.

PARTNERS
Jefferson County Public Schools, Jewish Family and Career Services, 
University of Louisville , Jefferson Community and Technical College, 
KY Refugee Ministries, Cath Charities MRS, Americana Community 
Center, LMG Depts and agencies, KentuckianaWorks, Sister Cities 
Louisville, World Affairs Council, Kentucky World Trade Center, 
Prospanica, Crane House Young professionals, many of the local 
foreign-born community-based organizations, Global Human Project                                                                                                                        

162

163

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWVISION 04: MAXIMIZE INNOVATION + CIVIC ENGAGEMENT

engage.

"To keep our city and our economy going 

strong, we have to adapt to a changing world 
by focusing on innovation and globalization." 

MAYOR'S STRATEGIC PLAN TARGETS

•  Deploy world-class skills to targeted employee segments and all prioritized working teams in 

Louisville by 2020. 

•  Design and implement a new management system for Louisville Metro Government capital 

projects by 2020. 

•  Cascade LouieStat enhancements to better drive change through problem solving and data-

based decisions by 2020.

•  Equalize Louisville Metro Government’s recurring operating budget, debt service and pay-go 

capital to or less than its recurring revenue in fiscal year 2020.  

•  Ensure that Louisville is prepared to enable smart city technologies and use infrastructure, 
technology, data and services through an equity lens to deliver municipal services by 2023.

•  Expand digital offerings and presence and increase transparency, availability and usability of 

information and data to improve citizen interaction and transparency by 2020. 

•  Modernize technology for prioritized Louisville Metro Government enterprise applications.
Increase participation in the volunteer programs managed by the Department of Resilience 
• 
and Community Services.
Increase compassionate activities to achieve 750,000 acts of compassion by 2020.

• 
•  Collaborate with the University of Louisville Institute for Sustainable Health & Optimal Aging 
Compassion Index to provide a compassion baseline for Louisville Metro and to partner with 
the aging sector to refine the Compassion Index. 

State of the City, Mayor Greg Fischer

164

165

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLE08 Actions 
4.1.1

Engage every Louisville resident to help others through volunteerism and service 
opportunities. 
Fully develop and implement Lean into Louisville.
Train the Louisville Metro Government employees and the community on implicit 
bias and its advancing racial equity. 
Establish the Louisville Equity Advisory Council to provide advice and guidance for 
Louisville's equity and resilience efforts. 
Establish the Mayor's Youth Advisory Council 
Build the capacity of residents and Louisville Metro Government to collaborate on 
decision-making processes that improve health and wellness. 

4.1.2
4.1.3

4.1.4

4.1.5
4.1.6

4.2.1

4.2.2

Fully develop and implement United Community platform to enhance navigation to 
services. 
Foster community trust by publishing and visualizing open data. 

2 Goals
4.1 
Cultivate Social-
change Agents 
and Foster Greater 
Community 
Cohesion

4.2 
Implement Shared 
Transparency & 
Accountability 
Measures with the 
Community

Innovate in Civic 
Engagement

Louisville’s global reputation for performance improvement 
and innovation allows us to adapt quickly to future 
challenges. We accomplish this through the use of 
data, technology, crowd-sourcing, smart city strategies 
and problem-solving to increase operational and fiscal 
performance through engaging community stakeholders in 
our innovation work. Technology will provide the platform 
for us to form a system of communication that allows us to 
efficiently address the basic needs of individuals in crisis.  
A system that promotes transparency builds integrity and 
trust.  Integrity and trust grow not only from transparency 
but also involvement.  It is getting involved to change social 
conditions so that all have equal opportunities.  By being 
social agents, residents support residents, creating social 
cohesion so that all may prosper.

Sustainable Development Goals

166

167

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWAt A GlanceAt A GlancePursuing his pledge to make Louisville a more caring city, Mayor Greg 
Fischer signed a resolution committing to a multi-year Compassionate 
Louisville campaign on November 11, 2011.  The Compassionate Louisville 
Values include hospitality, abundance, awareness and understanding, 
intention, compassion, beauty, inclusion, transparency, and is universally 
positive.  Exhibiting these values, the Mayor’s Give a Day of Service began 
with a “one day call to serve others” and has evolved to a week of service 
moving from 80 volunteers in 2011 to over 200,000 volunteers in 2019.  

Louisville's Social Change 
Agents: Give a Day Week 2019
437,518
total volunteer hours given to projects:

raised by Lucy Lu Bakes' online bake sale 
with proceeds going to Scarlet's Bakery

thank you notes written by Global 

$800
198

4,400
38,000

Game Changers

units of blood donated at Red Cross 

blood drives

158

beds built for Jefferson County 

Public Schools students

pounds of food donated through 
Kroger and Dare to Care food drives

19,000

Brightside volunteers cleaned up 

neighbourhoods and parks in Louisville

710 Random Acts of 
Kindness volunteers gave 
1,420 hours in acts of 
compassion
4,200 We Day volunteers 
gave 32,556 hours of 
service
59,000 JCPS students 
and teacher volunteers 
worked on service projects
1,020 Louisville Metro 
Government employees 
volunteered 4,000 hours 
of service

GOAL 4.1
Cultivate Social-change 
Agents and Foster 
Greater Community 
Cohesion 

The 2013 Social Change Impact Report identifies the profile of 
people who are social-change agents based upon survey results that 
shaped six classifications:  1. Ultra-committed Change-Maker (13% 
of U.S. respondents);  2. Faith-Inspired Giver (17% US);  3. Socially 
Conscious Consumer (11% US);  4. Purposeful Participant (18% US);  
5. Casual Contributor (14% US) and 6. Social Change Spectator (15% 
US). The remaining 12% U.S. respondents reported not engaging 
in social change.  In the United States, 95% of Faith-Inspired Givers 
and 83% of Social Change Agent respondents stated that it is 
very or somewhat important to them personally to be involved in 
positive social change. (www.WALDENU/IMPACTREPORT)  Social 
Change Agent reflects volunteerism, social issue education, working 
together, and empowering residents – all intended to build social 
cohesion that improves the lives of individuals, neighborhoods and 
community. This creates an environment of trust where residents can 
build a better future.       

SPOTLIGHT
MAYOR'S GIVE A DAY

The Mayor’s Give A Day Week of Service 
is an annual showcase and celebration 
of compassion and service in all areas of 
the Louisville community.  The entire city 
engages in volunteerism where individuals, 
businesses and government work together 
to improve the lives of our residents and 
build a sense of community and social 
cohesion.  

168

169

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWengage

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Completed grant applications 

and donors.
Increased program 
participation by organizations 
and various sectors.

• 

•  Developed evaluation tool.

$

TIME-FRAME
0-1 Year

FUNDING
Partially Funded

OWNER
Louisville Metro 
Office of Equity

ACTION 4.1.1
Engage every Louisville 
resident to help others 
through volunteerism and 
service opportunities. 

ACTION 4.1.2
Fully develop and 
implement Lean 
into Louisville.

Key Next Steps

Key Next Steps

TIME-FRAME
5+ Years

FUNDING
Unfunded

$

OWNER
Louisville Metro 
Mayor’s Office

RELATED PLANS
Mayor’s Strategic Plan

•  Expand community participation through outreach to schools, 

faith community, organizations and businesses. 

•  Educate the community on volunteerism and community needs. 
•  Foster engagement of current partners.    

Background

After taking office in January 2011, Mayor Fischer issued a “one day 
call to service” to the community. He approached key community 
leaders and asked them to join him.  The response from the 
community was overwhelming and over 800 volunteers participated 
in the inaugural Mayor’s Give A Day (MGAD) in 2011.  In 2019, 
MGAD expanded to a week-long event of volunteerism with over 
235,000 community members joining and championing this annual 
celebration by making time for volunteer service and compassion. 

•  Raise funds to support the Lean Into Louisville program, develop 

community partnerships, and develop program evaluation.

Background

Lean Into Louisville is a city-wide initiative designed to explore 
and confront all forms of historical and systemic discrimination and 
build a more equitable city where everyone can thrive. While being 
launched and hosted by Metro Government, Lean Into Louisville 
will highlight and support emerging programs and initiatives from 
community partners and help facilitate cross-sector collaboration.  
Lean Into Louisville is an unprecedented series of conversations, 
presentations, and activities and art exhibits to confront the history 
and legacy of all forms of discrimination and inequality in this 
community.                          

• 

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
Increased volunteerism by 
• 
15% annually.
Increased community 
awareness to build 
participation of businesses, 
schools, and faith 
communities. 
Increased service 
opportunities through 
collaboration.

• 

Why is it important?

Why is it important?

Mayor Fischer realized that a compassionate community is one 
where all members understand their connectedness to each other 
and realize the importance of all citizens working together for 
the greater good.  Mayor Fischer has continued partnering with 
all citizens (neighborhoods, universities, philanthropies, religious 
institutions and businesses) and is leveraging their collective 
expertise to support and expand the work of MGAD and year-long 
compassion initiatives.

PARTNERS
Metro United Way, Jefferson County Public Schools, WE DAY, 
Brightside, Global Game Changers, Kentucky Derby Festival    

This is a time of unprecedented division in our country.  Considering 
this fact Louisville Metro Government is beginning an initiative 
that jumps right into the divide with the intention of first studying, 
understanding, and looking at it the problem honestly before 
attempting to fix it. The reason that racism and other forms of 
discrimination continue to exist in our country is that we’ve never 
really looked at it head on; we have not understood our own history 
and therefore we are not listening to the people most affected by 
that history. 

PARTNERS
Louisville Metro Mayor’s Office, Office of Equity, 
all Louisville Metro Government departments                                                                                                                                      
                                  

170

171

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWACTION 4.1.3
Train the Louisville Metro 
Government employees 
and the community 
on implicit bias and its 
advancing racial equity.

Key Next Steps
•  Train the community on implicit bias.

Background

Understanding implicit bias is important because of its connection to 
structural inequality. Addressing implicit bias on multiple levels (e.g., 
individual and institutional) is critical for achieving social justice.  The 
purpose of this project is to train the community on implicit bias 
and its negative impact, and advance racial equity.  Training will be 
conducted by individual department trainers, volunteer trainers, and 
hired expert trainers. In addition, the $10 million “Bias Bus” which is 
a 100-stop tour to workplaces, universities, and communities across 
the country, with a goal of reaching one million people in person 
and online has scheduled a stop in Louisville Metro.  The Bias Bus is 
a mobile information center that includes: live interactive sessions; 
a digital library of educational materials (video and podcast) with 
optional self-assessment and educational quizzes; and a space for 
participants to reflect on unconscious biases and how they could 
potentially influence the workplace, classroom, and other settings.

Why is it important?

Implicit bias refers to the attitudes or stereotypes that affect our 
understanding, actions, and decisions in an unconscious manner and 
although implicit biases can be positive or negative, both can have 
harmful effects when they influence our decision-making. Advancing 
racial equity involves removing barriers and closing gaps by race in 
order to achieve institutional and systemic equity.

PARTNERS
Office of Equity, Louisville Metro Human Resources, and volunteers

$

TIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

OWNER
Louisville Metro 
Office of Equity

POTENTIAL KEY 
INDICATORS
•  Ensured community 
and Louisville Metro 
Government employees 
understanding of the 
consequences of implicit 
bias.

engage

ACTION 4.1.4
Establish the Louisville 
Equity Advisory Council to 
provide advice and guidance 
for Louisville’s equity and 
resilience efforts.

Key Next Steps
• 

Identify and select potential Equity Advisory Council team 
members.

Background

An Equity Advisory Council, made up of diverse representatives from 
neighborhood and community organizations as well as development, 
faith-based, and business interests is contemplated that would be 
charged with the responsibility of advising and providing guidance 
on recommended goals, objectives, and policies of the Office of 
Equity and Office of Resilience.

Why is it important?

The duties and responsibilities of the Office of Equity and Office 
of Resilience are numerous and multifarious, and directly affect 
individuals, faith-based, and business communities.  Direct advice 
and counsel from representatives of these entities are necessary.

PARTNERS
Louisville Metro Office of Equity, Office of Resilience, 
and community leaders.

$

TIME-FRAME
0-1 Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

OWNER
Louisville Metro 
Office of Equity

POTENTIAL KEY 
INDICATORS
•  Created Equity 

Advisory Council team 
members.

172

173

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWengage

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Three developed 

(and presented to the 
Mayor) youth-led policy 
recommendations that aim at 
making Louisville a safer city.
Increased number of youths 
actively participating in the 
national Youth Violence 
Prevention Week.

ACTION 4.1.5
Establish the Mayor’s 
Youth Advisory Council.

$

TIME-FRAME
5+ Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

OWNERS
Office of Safe 
and Healthy 
Neighborhoods

RELATED PLANS
One Love Louisville 
Youth Plan   

Key Next Steps

Why is it important?

• 

•  Recruit 26 youths ages 16 to 24 to form a youth advisory cohort.  
•  Plan and host the annual Youth Violence Prevention Week 

campaign.  

•  Convene and facilitate Youth Policy Agenda meetings.

Background

One Love Louisville is a campaign launched in January 2015 by 
Mayor Greg Fischer to promote safe and healthy neighborhoods. 
This campaign focuses on reducing homicide, suicide, and 
drug overdose rates throughout the city of Louisville with 
emphasis on youth violence prevention.  The campaign aims to 
increase opportunities in 1) community building, 2) education, 
3) employment and economic development 4) health and social 
wellness,  and 5) juvenile and criminal justice.  The One Love 
Louisville Youth Implementation Team (YIT) advises the Office for 
Safe and Healthy Neighborhoods team and its partners consisting 
of the Mayor, Chief of Community Building, Louisville Metro 
Department of Public Health and Wellness and the Louisville Metro 
Police Department.  The YIT assists with the execution of the One 
Love Louisville: Youth Edition Action Plan, meeting once a month 
from September through June.
                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                   

Mayor Fischer created the Violence Prevention Work Group (VPWG) 
in June 2012 to take a hard look at violence in our community, 
identify the root causes and develop holistic strategies with long-
term impacts. He chose more than 30 citizens to serve on the 
VPWG, co-chaired by Dr. Blain Hudson and Dr. LaQuandra Nesbitt. 
This group was comprised of neighborhood residents, corporate, 
community, faith-based and government partners. After much 
discourse, research and review, the VPWG found that in order to 
increase positive outcomes and decrease violence in Louisville, 
the solution would have to be collective. In agreement with the 
systems theory, the VPWG pinpointed five areas of engagement 
that impact and/or inform each other. The following five Core 
Areas of Engagement illustrate the scope of the Office for Safe and 
Healthy Neighborhoods (OSHN):  Community Building; Education; 
Employment and Economic Development; Health and Social 
Wellness; and Juvenile and Criminal Justice. 

PARTNERS
Mayor Greg Fischer, Louisville Metro Chief of Community Building, 
Louisville Metro Department of Public Health and Wellness, and 
Louisville Metro Police Department representative.                                      

174

175

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWTIME-FRAME
1-5 Years

FUNDING
Fully Funded

$

OWNERS
Louisville Metro 
Department of Public 
Health & Wellness 
Center for Health 
Equity

RELATED PLANS
Participatory Budgeting, 
Neighborhood and 
Public Meetings 

ACTION 4.1.6
Build the capacity of 
residents and Louisville 
Metro Government to 
collaborate on decision-
making processes that 
improve health and wellness. 

Key Next Steps

•  Build residents’ capacity to influence Louisville Metro 

Government budget allocation decisions.

Background
In October 2016, the Center for Health Equity held its first policy 
summit, My Dream for Lou. To prepare, residents took part in 
a photovoice process, sharing what gave them hope in their 
community. These responses were divided into four working groups: 
1) Economic Development and Investment, 2) Quality Housing, 3) 
Recreation & Public Spaces for Healing and Social Change, and 
4) Community Capacity Building. At the end of the summit, two 
groups, Recreation & Public Spaces for Healing and Social Change, 
and Community Capacity Building shared participatory budgeting as 
a desired policy for Louisville. Since then, Center for Health Equity 
staff have worked hard to do background research, get technical 
assistance, secure funding, and lay the groundwork for Louisville’s 
first pilot process.  

Participatory Budgeting (PB) is a different way to manage public 
money, and to engage people in government. It is a democratic 
process in which community members directly decide how to 
spend part of a public budget enabling residents to work with 
government to make the budget decisions that affect their lives. 
PB was designed to create opportunities for local communities 
to have decision-making power over how local money is spent. 

engage

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
• 

Increased participatory 
budgeting voters especially 
those from traditionally 
marginalized communities.

•  Restructured Louisville Metro 

Government budgeting 
process allocating funds for 
community decision-making. 

The PB process involves an annual cycle of brainstorming and 
voting to fund community submitted ideas. For this community-
led pilot initiative, residents of Louisville Metro Council Districts 
6 and 8 have an opportunity to have a say in a PB initiative 
sponsored by Louisville Metro Government and opportunities 
for input occur at every step. Through PB, government officials 
can hear directly from residents about their priorities. On the 
other hand, residents can learn more about how government 
processes work. Together, this builds more transparency and 
trust. Residents also gain leadership skills, and those who 
cannot participate in traditional voting are able to have a voice.                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                               
Why is it important?
In Louisville, the legislative body determines allocation of funds that 
may be incongruent with the priorities of marginalized residents.  

PARTNERS
Louisville Metro Government Agencies                                      

HELPING COMMUNITIES

GET HEALTHIER

176

177

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWGOAL 4.2
Implement Shared 
Transparency & 
Accountability 
Measures with the 
Community

Technology is a source of communication and measurement that 
conveys transparency and accountability – building a sense of trust.  
However, transparency is not enough if the retrieved information is 
left open for interpretation. Residents need to understand the intent 
and purpose behind the data to accurately interpret the information.  
If applied correctly, technology is a significant door to education and 
understanding.          

SPOTLIGHT
UNITED COMMUNITY 

United Community will provide the 
foundation for a connected community 
support system that improves the life 
outcomes of children, individuals and 
families across Louisville and the region by 
facilitating integrated, multidimensional 
supports for our most vulnerable.

In October 2013, Mayor Fischer signed an executive order entitled, “An 
Executive Order Creating an Open Data Plan” directing Louisville Metro 
Government to review its data and make it more accessible to the public 
through an open data portal. Years prior, the Louisville/Jefferson County 
Information Consortium (LOJIC) – a multi-agency partnership – formed 
to build and maintain a Geographic Information System that became the 
source of the mayor’s requested open data system1.  The system’s purpose 
is to increase transparency of government and improve public service.  It 
fosters entrepreneurship advancing the growth of the ‘digital economy’ 
allowing businesses to make quicker decisions on investments and 
enhancements in the community. The open data system proactively meets 
the demand for data. 

Louisville LOJIC Open Geospatial Data: Data Categories

Addressing

Demographics

Elevation

Environment

Flooding

Planning

List All LOJIC 

Data

Aerial 

Photography

Political

Public Safety

Society

Transportation

Data source: Open Data Initiative, Louisville Metro Government

178

179

1 

https://www.lojic.org/abiyt/our-vision; https://www.lojc-gis-open-data-policy

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWengage

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Created a seamless, 

institutionalized network that 
connects residents to services 
through a shared platform that 
provides shared data.

•  Met all residents have their 

basic needs met when seeking 
services.   

Why is it important?

Coordinating the care and support of the most vulnerable members 
of our community is extraordinarily difficult. The existing systems 
that provide the needed supports are fractured and disconnected, 
resulting in fragmented service delivery and persistent poor 
outcomes. Currently, there is no way to seamlessly connect 
individuals to every type of service they require, resulting in 
people slipping through the cracks between referrals. The lack of 
coordination between health, social service, and education sectors 
also creates additional burden on the consumer's access to services.  

PARTNERS
Jewish Heritage Fund for Excellence, James Graham Brown 
Foundation, Metro United Way, Community Foundation 
of Louisville, Louisville Metro Public Health Department, 
Louisville Gas & Electric Company, Kindred Healthcare                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                 

TIME-FRAME
0-1 Year

FUNDING
Partially Funded

OWNERS
Metro United Way 

$

ACTION 4.2.1
Fully develop and 
implement United 
Community platform to 
enhance navigation of 
services.

Key Next Steps

•  Coordinate partner and license utilization.  
•  Develop referral capacity by service category and referral 

response time.  

•  Establish goal for network growth.  
•  Formalize network standard for referral response time. 

Background
United Community is an effort to implement a shared, technology-
based platform that will create a coordinated, community-wide 
system linking information and referrals between the health, 
education and social service sectors to more effectively meet 
the needs of children, individuals and families. It will provide the 
infrastructure that enables groups and agencies such as schools, 
doctor’s offices, hospitals, foodbanks, and social service providers, 
to share data through individual consent and create seamless 
referrals to meet every type of care needed. With the United 
Community shared data platform: 
 

1.  Residents are assessed for needs, no matter their entry 

point, and are connected to wraparound supports to help 
them overcome barriers;  

2.  Teachers, caseworkers, and physicians can share vital 

information about individuals’ needs, enhancing their ability 
to coordinate care; 

3.  Providers can track and monitor referrals and follow-up to 

ensure residents are getting connected to the resources 
they need; and 

4.  Community leaders gain visibility into the number and types 
of services most needed and where gaps are within existing 
resources.                                                                                                                           

180

181

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWengage

POTENTIAL KEY INDICATORS
•  Published and automated 

open data.

•  Used stories and visualizations 

for open data.

•  Published LouieStat 
dashboards and data.
•  Engaged the public on 

understanding and using data.

Why is it important?
Sharing data with the public enables them to better understand 
Louisville Metro’s operations and to use the data for transparency, 
research, analysis, and feedback. It also enables wider data sharing 
across Louisville Metro and more opportunities for innovation, 
process improvement, and data-driven decision making at all levels.

PARTNERS
Office of Performance Improvement and Innovation 
(OPI2), Department of Information Technology                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                

TIME-FRAME
1-2 Years

FUNDING
Partially Funded

$

OWNER
Louisville Metro 
Office of Performance 
Improvement and 
Innovation

RELATED PLANS
Open Data Policy

ACTION 4.2.2
Foster community 
trust by publishing and 
visualizing open data.

Key Next Steps
•  Use the Data Inventory and revised Open Data Policy to 

prioritize datasets for release and automation. 

•  Continue to train employees on how to create and publish 

public online dashboards and StoryMaps.

Background
The Office of Performance Improvement and Innovation (OPI2) and 
the Data Governance team have worked to create a Data Inventory 
detailing all metro-owned datasets. Guidelines for prioritization 
of publication are being detailed in the revised Open Data Policy. 
OPI2, Data Governance, and Performance Partners have been 
working on Power BI trainings and OPI2 has given 20 data people 
across the city access to the Pro version that includes the ability 
to publish a dashboard online at no cost to the departments. 
Through LouieStat 2.0, it is anticipated that the publication and 
automation of more datasets will occur on the Open Data website, 
as well as the publication of LouieStat dashboards online. Where 
applicable, StoryMaps and ArcGIS dashboards will also be published 
for geospatial data. The ultimate goal is the creation of a data 
warehouse and automation tools to increase ease of data sharing, 
standardization, quality, publication, and visualization.                                                                                                                        

182

183

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEOUR CITY TOMORROWOUR CITY TOMORROWSteps 05

Next 

184

185

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLENEXT STEPSNEXT STEPSNext 
Steps

The Louisville Resilience Strategy Document presents 
both government and community led actions. This is 
a strength. The Louisville Resilience Equation, R=E+C+T, provides 
our direction. We will have trials as Louisville struggles to find a 
way to address the fiscal challenges of the chronically underfunded 
state pension system coupled with a reluctance to raise revenues for 
investing in Louisville’s future.  

We are reassured because the individuals who assisted with the 
direction and development of our strategy document indicated 
their commitment to stay engaged. The strategy requires a robust 
community commitment to the visions, goals and actions generated.  
Louisville Resilience will call upon our committed residents to review 
and shape the implementation of the Resilience Equation.

Louisville brings together the Steering Committee and Working 
Group participants either through this effort or the efforts of the 
Trauma-Informed Community initiative, Compassionate Louisville, 
Evolve 502, BOUNCE, United Community, Vision Russell, the 
Louisville Climate Adaptation Plan, the Homeless Encampment Task 
Force, Trees Louisville and the many other community efforts.  In 
response to the community’s call, we must respond with how these 
initiatives can expand to a wider community of active participation 
and understanding.

RESILIENCE

EQUITY

COMPASSION

PARTNERS

Throughout our process, it became apparent that many actions 
promoting equity, compassion and trust exist. While this is great 
news, we recognize that there is a disconnect between members 
of the community and the work. We propose to overcome 
that gap through ongoing reporting and community 
participation as drivers of our next steps.  

A strength of 100 Resilient Cities is its national and international 
network. The Louisville Strategy built on inspiration from cities such 
as Tulsa, Boston and Atlanta whose Resilience Strategies address 
inequities. Los Angeles and Nashville provided support and expertise 
guiding Louisville’s endeavors to address homelessness.  Pittsburgh 
shares the Ohio River and climate impacts similar to what Louisville 
faces.  This network of cities formed lasting partnerships built upon 
bonds of mutual commitment and the recognition that cities are 
living policy laboratories for change and progress.  

COMMUNITY

TRUST

GOVERNMENT

NETWORK OF 

CITIES

186

187

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLENEXT STEPSNEXT STEPSThank You

188

189

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEAcknowledgements

Louisville Resilience is proud to share this strategy not only with our 
Louisville residents but also nationally and globally.  The Louisville 
Resilience strategy document reflects the many voices within our 
community - the residents, businesses, non-profits, philanthropic, 
government, academia, and faith-based communities.   Thank you for your 
vision, dedication, and commitment to imagine a resilient Louisville where 
all residents have equal opportunity to thrive.

100 Resilient Cities
Corinne LeTourneau, Managing Director, North America
Peter Jenkins, Senior Program Manager
Paul Lillehaugen, Regional Program Manager

Louisville Resilience Strategy Team
Eric Friedlander, Chief Resilience Officer
Betty “BJ” Adkins, Director of Community Resource Development
Leah Bell, Project Manager

Louisville Resilience Core Team
Darrell Aniton, Social Services Policy & Advocacy Manager, Office of 
Resilience & Community Services
Carrick Arehart, Executive Administrator, Louisville Free Public Library
Aja Barber, Community Health Manager, Public Health and Wellness
Mitchell Burmeister, Organizational Performance Analyst, Emergency 
management Agency
Janice Cates, Director of Development & Compassion Initiatives, Office of 
Mayor Greg Fischer
DeVon Hankins, Project Manager, Office of Performance Improvement
Robin Hawkins, Project Manager, Office of Safe and Healthy 
Neighborhoods
Michelle King, Director of Program Planning, Air Pollution Control District
Maria Koetter, Director, Office of Sustainability
Coretta McAllister, Administrative Assistant, Mayor’s Office
Daro Mott, Chief, Office of Performance Improvement
Ricky Santiago, Project Manager, Office of Globalization
Dr. Allison Smith, Urban Planner, Office of Advanced Planning
Erica Smith, Budget Planning Analyst, Office of Management & Budget
Natalie Vezina, Sustainability Project Coordinator, Office of Sustainability
Anna Shobe-Wallace, Social Services Policy & Advocacy Manager, Office of 
Resilience & Community Services
Mary Ann Westenhofer, Executive Administrator, Louisville Metro Parks

Strategy Partner
Paul Kulig, Principal, Perkins + Will
Jessica Florez, Project Manager / Urban Designer, Perkins + Will 
Eunice Wong, Urban Designer, Perkins + Will
Janice Cheung, Urban Designer, Perkins + Will

Office of Mayor Greg Fischer, Leadership Team
Greg Fischer, Mayor
Katie Dailinger, Deputy Chief of Staff
Babs Elliott, Assistant General Counsel
Eric Friedlander, Chief Resilience Officer
Daniel Frockt, Chief Financial Officer
Doug Hamilton, Chief of Public Services
Ellen Hesen, Deputy Mayor
Vincent James, Chief of Community Building
Teresa Lajara, Metro Council Liaison

Louisville Metro Government Departments
Police Department
Louisville Free Public Library
Facilities and Fleet Management
Louisville Fire
Emergency Services
Department of Correction
Public Works & Assets
Metro Animal Services
Public Health & Wellness
Youth Detention Services
Parks & Recreation

Sara Massey, Director of Intergovernmental Affairs
Carmen Moreno-Rivera, Interim Chief of Performance 
Improvement
Jeff Mosley, General Counsel
Jean Porter, Communications Director
Grace Simrall, Chief of Civic Innovation
Kellie Watson, Chief of Equity
Mary Ellen Wiederwohl, Chief of Louisville Forward

Louisville Zoo
Office for Safe & Healthy Neighborhoods
Office of Resilience and Community Services
Economic Development
Develop Louisville
Codes and Regulations
Office of Management & Budget
Human Resources
Human Relations Commission
Office of Performance Improvement
Department of Information Technology

190

191

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLESteering Committee
Savvy Kareem-Abdul Shabazz, Case Management, 
Reimage 
David Allgood, Director of Advocacy, Center for 
Accessible Living
Mechelle Artis, Law Intern, Morgan and Pottinger
Dr. Muhammad Babar, President, Doctors for 
Healthy Communities, Inc.
Lourdes Baez, Director of Government Relations & 
Advocacy, Baptist Health
Dr. Orville Blackman, Director of the Senior 
Workforce Center, Jewish Family Career Services
Danielle Brown, Student Intern, Louisville Climate 
Action Network
Jessica Brown, Planning and Programs Associate, 
Center for Neighborhoods 
Chris Chandler, KY Director of Urban Conservation, 
The Nature Conservancy
Veronica Combs, Executive Director, Institute for 
Healthy Air, Water & Soil
Aida Copic, Director of Planning, TARC
Lisa DeJaco Crutcher, CEO, Catholic Charities of 
Louisville, Inc.
Kem Delaney-Ellis, Director of Health Policy, Norton 
Healthcare
Michael Dossett, Director, Kentucky Emergency 
Management
Annie Dutton, Vice President of Government Affairs, 
Building Industry Association of Greater Louisville
Sandra Duverge, Board of Directors Co-chair, 
Passport Health Plan & La Casita
Dr. Erin Frazier, Pediatrician, Norton Healthcare
Jaydee Graham, Family Advocate, Family Scholar 
House
Ann Hagan-Grigsby, Chief Executive Officer, Park 
DuValle Community Health Center, Inc.

Working Group Co-chairs
Group 1 – Enrich Culture of Compassion and Trust
Gena Redmon-Harris, Office of Resilience and 
Community Services
Sarah Reed, Interfaith Relations
Group 2 – Enhance Resilience to Trauma
Betty (BJ) Adkins, Office of Resilience
Adria Johnson, Metro United Way

192

Timothy J. Hagerty, Member, Frost Brown Todd, LLC
Co-chair, Greater Louisville, Inc. Public Policy Council
Jennifer Hancock, President & CEO, Volunteers of 
America 
Jordan Harris, President, Pegasus Institute
Jennifer Helgeson, CEO, Boys & Girls Club of 
Kentuckiana
Luis Huber-Calvo, Urban Planner & Architect, MKSK 
Studios
Nate Kratzer, Data Analyst, Greater Louisville Project
Jo Lloyd-Triplett, Program Manager, Leadership 
Louisville
Meredith Loeb, Director of Tocqueville Society, 
Metro United Way
Howard Mason, Principal, New Possibilities 
Associates
Ted Nixon, CEO, D.D. Williamson
Lis Plana, Racial Equity Youth Council Member, 
League of Cities
David Prince, IT Manager, Louisville Regional Airport 
Authority
Jenny Recktenwald, Interim Director, OneWest
John H. Shaw-Woo, Founder/Executive Director  
6 Foundation, Inc.
Founder/CEO, The West Louisville ecoHUB Arts 
Community, Inc.
Amy Shir, Executive Director, LHOME
Stan Siegwald, Director of Strategic Initiatives, Dare 
to Care Food Bank 
Patrick Smith, Office of Community Engagement, 
University of Louisville
Ked Stanfield, Director, Louisville Grows
Iris Wilbur, Director of Government Affairs & Public 
Policy, Greater Louisville, Inc.

Group 3 – Increase Financial Capacity, Wealth 
Building and Economic Development
Eric Friedlander, Chief Resilience Officer
Evon Smith, OneWest
Group 4 – Strengthen Built and Natural Infrastructure 
that Promotes Health and Wellbeing
Keith Talley, Air Pollution Control District
Ted Smith, Envirome Institute

Working Group Members
We apologize for any community 
members who participated that 
may not have been included. 

Lauren Anderson
Joe Bargione
Deborah Barnes Byers
Russell Barnett
Debbie Belt
Deborah Bilitski
Kimberly Boyd-Lane
Alice Bridges
Martin Brooks
Danielle Brown
Jeff Brown
Shannon Burch
Leigh Anne Burke-Schaad
Ann Carroll
Mark Cancia
Janice Cates
Chris Chandler
Shelby Chaney
Victoria Clemons
Aida Copic
Tim Corrigan
Spencer Cox
Kimberly Denzik
Kesha Deonarine
Shannon Derrick
Sandra DuVerge
Theodore Eidem
Dan Farrell 
Jamesetta Ferguson
David Finke
Cheryl Fisher
Pete Flood
Mikal Forbush
Elisa Freeman-Carr

Carrie Fry
Anita Gadson
Phil Garrett
Cynthia Garrison
Layla George
Saundra Gibson
Barbie Gilbert
Nancy Givens
Angela Graham
Raechele Gray
Adam Hall
Nick Hart
Chris Hartman
Morgan Hawker
Lauren Heberle
Andres Held
Jud Hendrix
Brenton Hereford
Ken Hillebrand
Mary Hornek
Tanisha Howard
Alicia Hullinger
Alyson Humphrey
Sameera Jackson
Judi Jennings
David Johnson
Lettie Johnson
Nicholas Johnson
Charlotte Jones
Mary Jones
Mike Jones
Lindsey Journey
Jessica Klein
Bennett Knox

John Koehlinger
Shari Kretzchmer
Shannon Lauder
Monica Leslie
Sarah Lindgren
Meredith Lobe
Christopher Locke
Lupe Lopez
Amy Luckett
Ken Luther
Tammy Markert
Howard Mason
Kurt Mason
W. Mark McGinley
Megan McGinn
Arden McLong
Wallace McMullen
Geoff Meehan
Amalia Mendoza
Gretchen Milliken
Libby Mills
Julia Mitchell
Tracy Monks
Dana Moody
Shannon Moody
John Nevitt
Toya Northington
Jeff O’Brien
Chris Owens
Emily Parento
Tony Peyton
Cynthia Read
Jenny Recktenwald
Jackie Richardson

Diane Roberts
Smith Rodes
Sam Rose
Joe Rotella
Erin Rutherford
Bibhuti Sar
Lisa Schardin
Andrea Schroeder
Elizabeth Senn-Alvey
John Shaw-Woo
Brittany Sims
Aleece Smith
Sarah Stalker
Ked Stanfield
Angela Storey
Milton Suggs
Cindi Sullivan
Wesley Syndor
Katrina Taylor
Donna Trabue
Pam Valdes
Laura Valentine
Erin Waddell
Tom Walton
Tina Ward-Pugh
Elizabeth Wessels-Martin
Mary Ann Westenhofer
Iris Wilbur
Jack Will
Lisa Lee Williams
Tom Williams
Beverly Winsch
Ray Yeager
Greg Zahradnik

193

RESILIENT LOUISVILLERESILIENT LOUISVILLEengage.

To download, visit:

https://louisvilleky.gov/resilience

196

RESILIENT LOUISVILLE