2 0 1 9

O ‘ A H U 
R E S I L I E N C E
S T R A T E G Y

1

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.orgContents

Foreword 

Executive Summary 

O‘ahu: Resilience Context 

Resilience Actions 

How to Read an Action           

Remaining Rooted 

Bouncing Forward 

Climate Security 

Community Cohesion 

Implementation 

Appendices 

Actions Summary 

References 

Glossary 

Acknowledgements 

4

10

14

23

24

26

50

70

102

124

128

130

135

145

149

Ola
In Hawaiian, the word ola means 
well-being, living, thriving, and 
healthy—but it also connotes sal-
vation, healing, and survival. The 
O‘ahu Resilience Strategy describes 
a clear vision for a thriving island 
community—even in the face of 
challenge and change. When all of 
us reclaim a shared responsibility 
for island resilience, we can look 
forward to ola loa: what Mary Kawe-
na Pukui defined as a state of being 
“completely cured and recovered.”

Contours of Change
The lines that animate the O‘ahu 
Resilience Strategy are inspired by 
topographic map lines  that bring a 
third dimension to the roots of our 
culture in Hawai‘i—our land and 
ocean. The concentric circles also 
evoke how change happens through a 
“ripple effect.” The action of just one 
individual will impact others, and 
when we work together change can 
occur across our island.

Cover photo by Sean Marrs
Inside cover photo by Elyse Butler

2

R E S I L I E N T   O ‘ A H U   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

3

 Foreword

Foreword   

Being Mayor of the City and County of Honolulu has been the greatest 
professional honor and joy of my life. I take great pride in our efforts to build 
a dense, vibrant city of the future in Honolulu’s urban center while protecting 
and preserving our rural communities and agricultural heritage. We can hike in 
a rainforest in the morning, take a meeting in the city’s financial and business 
center, and watch a sunset or take a swim at a world-class beach at day’s end.
  But we are quickly learning that none of these gifts are guaranteed 
to us. Honolulu faces profound challenges that are quietly eroding our 
island quality of life. A changing climate has started to dry our rain-
forest, we’ve lost a quarter of our beaches, and economic and demo-
graphic pressures are stressing community bonds.
 

  Second, as you read this document 
you’ll realize that we have intention-
ally steered away from vague language 
and general vision statements to focus 
attention on 44 discrete policies and 
projects that are measurable and 
meaningful. We know that time is 
short, and it is time for action.
  As Nainoa Thompson, Native Ha-
waiian navigator and President of the 
Polynesian Voyaging Society, said at 
our kickoff for the Resilience Strategy 
Steering Committee just over a year 
ago, during these unprecedented times 
“it is more risky to remain tied at the 
dock than to sail.” With the launch of 
this Resilience Strategy, we ask that 
you voyage with us as a community 
to create a more resilient and secure 
future for our island. 

He wa‘a he moku. He moku he wa‘a.*

*A canoe is an island. An island 
 is a canoe.

Kirk Caldwell
Mayor
City and County of Honolulu

 

       We also realize that following 
a year of storms, flooding, and di-
saster statewide there are more on 
the horizon, and that our physical 
and social infrastructure are going 
to be tested not only over the next 
two years of my administration 
but for many decades beyond.
      That’s why I’m proud to release 
O‘ahu’s first Resilience Strategy 
at this particular moment in time. 
As Mayor, I know how critical it 
is for local government to step 
up and be responsible where our 
current federal administration 
has abdicated leadership on both 
economic equity and climate resil-
ience issues. In fact, you’ll find in this Strategy that we directly tie our 
success on the world’s most isolated island to the global community 
through the Paris climate agreement and the UN sustainable develop-
ment goals. 
  We are entering a different era, and you’ll find this Strategy is dif-
ferent as well. 
  First, it was shaped by residents and stakeholders from outside the 
City through a deeply participatory process. I’m very proud that our 
administration was awarded the 2018 Public Education and Outreach 
Award by the Hawai‘i Chapter of the American Planning Association 
for the innovative ways this Strategy engaged the public. I want to also 
thank the Resilience Strategy Steering Committee who have invested 
in our shared success.

 

Aloha,

value of community, our history, and 
our hopes for the future. 
 
‘A‘ohe pu‘u ki‘eki‘e ho‘a‘o ‘ia e pi‘i – 
No cliff is so tall it cannot be climbed. 
While much hard work lies ahead, we 
will come together as our ancestors 
did to ensure resilience for our people.

Native Hawaiians have long known the need for a resilient community. Our 
ancestors understood that it is vital to protect our water and our land to ensure 
that it would be able support us not only in prosperous times but also in times 
of hardship. The ahupua‘a provided enough resources for all to thrive. This sys-
tem was the product of hundreds of years of knowledge and served our people 
well for generations. 
  O‘ahu has grown and changed but the connection between the ‘āina 
and her people remain. From family celebrations in our beach parks 
to moments of solitude in our mountains, we remain tied to this land. 
But our people can feel a shift—beaches are narrowing, rentals are 
harder to find, and some of those places that offered solitude are now 
overrun.  This is true in the wind-
ward district I proudly represent, 
but increasingly all around our 
island. 
        I am heartened that many 
leaders from my district, includ-
ing my senior staff, have had the 
opportunity to join with voices 
from across the island to form 
this Resilience Strategy. The 
actions included in its pages are 
the framework for how we, as 
government and as an island, can 
begin returning to the tenants 
of stewardship and preparation 
that we saw in times past. Build-
ing and celebrating community, 
ensuring an affordable home for our families, and preparing to face 
rising natural disasters together are multifaceted challenges that we 
must rise together to meet. The private sector and non-profit leaders 
who stepped up to lead this effort will find a willing partner in our 
City Council to seriously face the twin challenges of long-term cost of 
living and climate change impacts. 
  As Council Chair, I pledge to lead the discussion as we come 
together to build a more resilient, sustainable, and affordable island. 
Not only will the actions outlined in this Resilience Strategy protect 
O‘ahu for our future generations, many will improve our shared qual-
ity of life as soon as they are implemented. The challenges we face 
require our City Council and the Administration to come together. We 
have an opportunity to reimagine a modern ahupua‘a that reflects our 

Ikaika Anderson
Chair
Honolulu City Council

4

5

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.org Foreword 

Foreword   

On behalf of the entire 100 Resilient Cities team, I want to congratu-
late Mayor Caldwell and the City and County of Honolulu on the release 
of the O‘ahu Resilience Strategy.
  By virtue of geography, O‘ahu residents understand the importance 
of mālama ‘āina – “caring for the land.” This value, and the reciprocity 
it confers, have driven O‘ahu’s resilience journey through a process 
that has been equal parts passionate, intensive, inclusive, and ambi-
tious. Since joining the 100 Resilient Cities (100RC) Network in 2016, 
Honolulu has faced major shocks like flooding and hurricanes along 
with persistent stresses like coastal erosion and a high cost of living. 
In response, we have witnessed an extraordinary degree of commu-
nity participation and support in taking action – even stretching 

 

the capacity of 100RC’s tools for 
stakeholder input!
       On this foundation, the Resil-
ience Strategy sets out as a clear 
plan of action to ensure that the 
island’s future is vibrant, livable, 
and resilient, and that residents 
have an opportunity to thrive. The 
44 initiatives contained within 
this document present immedi-
ate and long-term steps that the 
City and its partners will take to 
address the most pressing is-
sues of housing affordability and 
economic opportunity, disaster 
preparedness, and climate action, 
while building on the strength of 

community to promote trust, partnership, and island leadership.
  Already O‘ahu has established itself as a climate leader, through 
ambitious targets to adopt 100 percent renewable fuel supply for 
transportation and electrical generation, and achieve island-wide 
carbon neutrality by 2045. Transforming O‘ahu’s energy economy will 
demonstrate replicable climate solutions while spurring local innova-
tion and economic self-sufficiency. The City will also take bold action 
on climate adaptation, addressing coastal erosion and responding to 
sea level rise. Through the 100RC partnership we have been proud to 
support solutions to facilitate resilient transit-oriented development, 
promote multi-benefit flood risk reduction in the Ala Wai Canal Wa-
tershed, and develop contextual social vulnerability data with and for 
partners.
  These actions would not be possible without the leadership of May-

or Kirk Caldwell, the tireless efforts 
and collaboration of Chief Resilience 
Officer (CRO) Joshua Stanbro and 
the Office of Climate Change, Sus-
tainability and Resiliency (Resilience 
Office), and the passionate participa-
tion of O‘ahu residents, who approved 
the 2016 City Charter amendment 
to create the Resilience Office and 
institutionalize Honolulu’s CRO 
position. Developed in consultation 
with more than 2,200 individuals and 
community groups, and in partnership 
with stakeholders from across City 
and County of Honolulu government 
and the public, private, non-profit, and 
academic sectors, this strategy is well 
poised to address O‘ahu’s most press-
ing resilience challenges.
  As proud as we are of the Resil-
ience Strategy and the achievement 
it represents, this document is just 
the beginning. With a permanently 
institutionalized Resilience Office and 
strong foundation built on collabora-
tion, we are confident that O‘ahu will 
be a beacon of island innovation and 
leadership as it continues its resil-
ience journey through implementa-
tion of the Resilience Strategy.

Sincerely,

Michael Berkowitz
President 
100 Resilient Cities 

It’s important to remember that 

As an island community, we inherently have a culture of resilience. The irony of 
being appointed as O‘ahu’s “first” Chief Resilience Officer in 2017 is that this work 
has been in progress for a thousand years. One of the most important reasons we 
turned to the community to help shape and draft this Strategy is that we wanted 
to tap the traditions and knowledge shaped by our remote geography and the col-
lective strength forged from our past to guide our future. I want to recognize and 
thank the more than 2,200 residents and hundreds of organizations that contrib-
uted generations of knowledge to the contents of this Strategy. This is not just the 
City and County of Honolulu’s blueprint for resilience, it is the community’s vision.
Personally, this Strategy gives me profound hope and pride in our 
als we compiled with the community 
community. Having served in the City Emergency Operations Center 
and our thought partners over the past 
in August last year as Hurricane 
year.
Lane bore down on O‘ahu, I wor-
 
ried for the safety of my 8-year-
although we face challenges together, 
old son and 10-year-old daughter 
we start from a position of strength. 
sheltering in Pālolo and what the 
For a large and diverse modern mu-
future holds for them. I think we 
nicipal population, we are remarkably 
all emerged from the 2018 storm 
aligned on our perceived areas of 
season resolved to be more pre-
both challenge and opportunity. This 
pared and resilient. 
makes sense because even though 
       This Strategy provides a 
Honolulu is a major national city, 
punch-list that will put our island 
we’re also still a close-knit small town 
on a stronger footing. In commu-
of neighbors and friends. 
nity meetings, we were told loud 
 
If you would like to join us on the 
and clear that residents want to 
path to resilience, please reach out 
see specific actions, they want 
any time to get involved by emailing 
to track progress with metrics 
resilientoahu@honolulu.gov or calling 
that can hold all of us accountable to each other, and they want to 
808-768-2277.
hear back on regular progress toward goals. The Resilience Office is 
committed to reporting back annually on our island’s sustainabili-
ty progress and staying in close connection with the communities 
that helped shape these actions. In exchange, we ask for your help in 
implementation. This strategy is only as strong as our collective will 
to act on it, but every time we act together—even if we initially fail and 
learn together—we will be building the most important elements of 
resilience: relationships and trust.
  Part of building that trust is showing the hundreds of pages of 
research, analysis, and studies that stand behind this document and 
back up both the community’s instincts around where we need to 
improve, and validate that the resilience actions proposed here will 
make a measureable difference. I invite everyone to go to resilientoa-
hu.org/resilience-strategy to see the full range of foundation materi-

Joshua Stanbro
Chief Resilience Officer 
& Executive Director
City and County of Honolulu Office 
of Climate Change, Sustainability 
and Resiliency

Imua!

 

6

7

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.org Foreword

O‘ahu Resilience Strategy 
Steering Committee
While this Resilience Strategy was informed by the community at 
large, and the Resilience Actions were created and prioritized by work-
ing groups comprised of more than 80 diverse members, the following 21 
leaders from the business and non-profit community helped inform the 
Resilience Strategy process from day one. The Resilience Strategy Steer-
ing Committee provided initial guidance, reviewed progress, and ulti-
mately approved this Strategy. Resilience for O‘ahu cannot be achieved 
by the City acting alone. We appreciate their mana‘o and service.

Chair, 
Roy K. Amemiya, Jr.
City and County 
of Honolulu

Cindy Adams
Aloha United Way

Lorraine Akiba
LHA Ventures

Rick Blangiardi
Hawai‘i News Now, 
KGMB, & KHNL

Celeste Connors
Hawai‘i Green Growth

Kyle Chock
Hawai‘i Regional 
Council 
of Carpenters

Captain Barry Choy
National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric 
Administration

Scott Glenn
Office of Environmental 
Quality Control, Depart-
ment of Health, State 
of Hawai‘i
Jan Harada
HT Hayashi Foundation

Tim Johns
Zephyr Insurance 
Company, Inc.

Micah A. Kāne
Hawai‘i Community 
Foundation

Dr. Karl Kim
National Disaster 
Preparedness Training 
Center

Dr. David Lassner
University of Hawai‘i 
System

Constance H. Lau
Hawaiian Electric 
Industries, Inc.

John Leong
Kupu and Pono Pacific

Colbert Matsumoto
Island Insurance 
Companies

Sherry 
Menor-McNamara
Chamber of Commerce 
of Hawai‘i 

Linda Schatz
Schatz Collaborative

Dr. Patrick K. 
Sullivan
Oceanit

Nainoa Thompson
Polynesian Voyaging 
Society

Dr. Richard R. 
Vuylsteke
East-West Center

Elisa Yadao
Hawai‘i Medical Service 
Association

8

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

Photo credit: Resilience Office

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

9

Executive
Summary

A thousand years ago, voyaging canoes 
arrived on our island and fostered a cul-
ture where no person or group should 
gain too much at the expense of our 
‘āina or people.

Photo by Nā‘ālehu Anthony

Since then, each wave of immigrants has brought 
their own cultural gifts to add. On a small island our 
shared value of community—where each individual 
gives a little so that the group ultimately benefits 
together—has always defined who we are. This core 
value provides a strong foundation for O‘ahu to sur-
vive, adapt, and thrive in a challenging future—but 
only if we empower our values with action.
   Recently, the gap between rich and poor has 
grown, the scale of tourism has reached into neigh-
borhoods and secluded areas, and natural disasters 
have pushed communities to the brink. Forty-five 
percent of O‘ahu residents live in a household where 
someone is contemplating leaving, and 78 percent 
of residents believe that climate change is going to 
impact them personally. Our modern voyaging canoe 
Hōkūle‘a left O‘ahu to circle the globe with a call to 
restore our central value of mālama ‘āina: stating un-
equivocally that our ability to continue to thrive on 
island Earth together is rooted in local communities 

turning towards a truly sustainable future.
   With this O‘ahu Resilience Strategy, the City 
and County of Honolulu picks up the torch from the 
Mālama Honua sail. The 44 actions within directly 
address the challenge of long-term affordability and 
the impacts of a climate crisis that is already driving 
islanders from their homes. Implementing this Strat-
egy will make us economically more self-sufficient 
and safer as island people.
   This Strategy was not the work product of one; 
it is a gut-check from thousands of residents who 
want to see action to protect the island they love. 
The good news is that with leadership and upfront 
investment, a higher quality of life will result for all 
O‘ahu residents. A healthy community pulls together 
in times of challenge, and we look forward to working 
alongside individuals, non-profits, businesses, and 
neighborhood organizations to steer O‘ahu’s course 
back to a thriving and equitable future.

PILLAR I. 

Remaining
Rooted

Ensuring an Affordable 
Future for Our Island

PILLAR II. 

Bouncing
Forward

Fostering Resilience
in the Face of Natural
Disasters

PILLAR III. 

Climate
Security

Tackling Climate Change
by Reducing Emissions
and Adapting to Impacts

PILLAR IV. 

Community
Cohesion

Leveraging the Strength
and Leadership of Local
Communities

Our place-based culture has the highest quality of 
life—and highest cost of living—in the nation. The 
City will invest in long-term solutions that increase 
self-sufficiency, reduce out-of-pocket expenses, 
and assure our community stay intact.

The threats from hurricanes, flooding, and ex-
treme weather are on the rise. The City will work 
with individuals, neighborhoods, and institutions 
to be prepared to absorb these blows and re-
bound in ways that put our entire community on 
stronger footing for each successive event.  

The climate crisis is the biggest challenge hu-
manity has ever faced, and as an island society we 
are facing the impacts first. The City must tran-
sition to a 100 percent clean energy economy as 
rapidly as possible and begin changing policies 
and our infrastructure to protect lives and proper-
ty that are increasingly in harm’s way.

Community is the essential element of resilience. 
The City must foster connectivity and collabora-
tion to ensure that when we are presented with 
economic and environmental challenges, we will 
come together stronger and tighter as one island 
‘ohana that cares for all.

1 0

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 1

100 
Resilient
Cities

Paris
Paris is developing 
resilient streets 
and public places 
using an integrated 
planning and design 
approach to support 
stormwater manage-
ment, social inclu-
sion, flexible uses, 
and green space 
enhancements.

Rotterdam
To seed new ways 
of thinking about 
water, social inclu-
sion, and urban life, 
Rotterdam’s Water 
Sensitive Rotter-
dam initiative seeks 
to embed climate 
adaptation into the 
city’s urban fabric 
through inclusive, 
participatory, and 
multi-scalar projects 
and programs.

CityXChange
At the 2018 CityX-
Change Summit, host-
ed by 100 Resilient Cit-
ies and the Rockefeller 
Foundation, Honolulu 
joined member cities, 
technology leaders, 
and investors in 
identifying innovative 
solutions and partner-
ships to address the 
resilience challenges 
facing cities. Honolulu 
explored solutions 
to lower transporta-
tion-related climate 
emissions and the cost 
of living for O‘ahu 
residents.

Amman 
Amman has taken 
an integrated 
approach to re-
newable-powered 
electric vehicle 
deployment, com-
bining municipal 
fleet replacement 
and targeted pub-
lic investments 
and incentives 
to reduce oil im-
ports, improve air 
quality, and spur 
innovation.

San Francisco
By embedding resilience principles 
into its 10-year Capital Plan and 5-year 
Financial Plan, San Francisco is taking 
a comprehensive approach to complex 
challenges and ensuring that depart-
ments can advance large initiatives in a 
predictable way.

San Francisco has created an inter-
active online Capital Project Map to 
provide additional transparency and 
public confidence in the city’s capital 
plan implementation.

Tulsa
Named for its area 
code, Tulsa’s “918 
Day” is a fun and 
inclusive celebration 
of the city’s diversity 
and multicultural-
ism that seeks to 
unify the community, 
increase hope, foster 
economic prosperity 
and support youth 
development. 

O‘ahu

Singapore
Honolulu participated 
in 100RC’s Asia-Pacific 
Resilience Implementation 
Workshop in tandem with 
the 2018 World Cities 
Summit in Singapore. 
Joining city leaders from 
across Asia, Oceania, and 
Africa, along with techni-
cal experts from 100RC’s 
Platform Partner Network, 
Honolulu explored and 
developed policy solutions 
to urban forestry and heat 
island management.

Melbourne
Melbourne is devel-
oping a strategy to 
expand, link, and 
manage a metro-
politan-scale urban 
forest, which will 
improve biodiversity, 
health, and wellbeing 
while reducing expo-
sure to hazards such 
as heatwaves and 
flooding.

Sydney
To strengthen com-
munity preparedness 
and foster social 
connectivity, Sydney 
is taking a multi-
pronged approach to 
capacity building for 
disaster prepared-
ness, engaging gov-
ernment, non-profits, 
businesses, and 
community groups in 
training, volun-
teering, and public 
awareness.

Wellington
To encourage commu-
nity-wide climate ad-
aptation actions, Wel-
lington is working with 
the education, arts, 
and sports sectors to 
develop new, creative, 
and engaging ways of 
communicating about 
climate change and 
sea level rise.

New York
Through the devel-
opment of Climate 
Resiliency Design 
Guidelines, New York 
City is incorporating 
forward-looking 
climate change data 
into the design of all 
City capital projects.

To help achieve 80 
percent greenhouse 
gas emissions reduc-
tions by 2050, New 
York City’s Greener, 
Greater Buildings Plan 
requires a compre-
hensive set of energy 
conservation measures 
for mid- and large-size 
buildings, including 
audits, benchmarking, 
retrofits, and upgrades 
coupled with work-
force development and 
project financing.

Atlanta
Atlanta is develop-
ing a resilient local 
food system by 
providing land for 
urban agriculture, 
increasing local 
food production, 
and improving 
access to fresh 
and healthy foods 
across the city.

Mexico City
Mexico City is advancing an integrated ap-
proach to disaster risk management for public 
facilities, incorporating resilience qualities 
into infrastructure design and operation, and 
utilizing assessment, reduction, and transfer 
mechanisms to better prepare for disasters.

New Orleans
New Orleans has 
established a 
Resilience Design 
Review Commit-
tee to embed 
resilience-driven 
design into the 
decision-making 
process and ensure 
that city-led infra-
structure projects 
achieve multiple 
benefits consistent 
with resilience 
goals.

By closely align-
ing the Hazard 
Mitigation Plan 
with the Capital 
Improvement Plan, 
New Orleans is en-
suring that capital 
projects leverage 
federal funds and 
advance disaster 
preparedness 
whenever possible.

q

Honolulu was selected in May 2016 to 
join the third cohort of 100 Resilient Cit-
ies (100RC), an initiative launched by the 
Rockefeller Foundation. This global network 
is dedicated to helping cities around the 
world become more resilient to the physi-
cal, social, and economic challenges of the 
21st century. 100RC provides this assistance 
through initial funding for a Chief Resil-
ience Officer in each member city to lead 
resilience efforts; resources for drafting a 
resilience strategy; membership in a global 
network of peer cities to share best practic-
es and challenges, and access to a variety 
of resilience tools.
 
This Network Connections map shows a 
cross-section of actions underway in cities 
across the globe that have helped inform 
our research for resilience actions and strat-
egies for O‘ahu. No matter where we live on 
the globe, we all wrestle with similar chal-
lenges to our communities. Participation 
in this worldwide resilience ‘ohana reminds 
us that sometimes difficult actions we take 
locally are not only being mirrored in other 
communities, but also adding up to global 
impact on a broad scale. 
 
100RC Network to identify solutions to our 
shared challenges and improve O’ahu’s re-
silience.
 
100resilientcities.org and the 
Rockefeller Foundation’s resilience work 
at rockefellerfoundation.org. 

The City will continue to leverage the 

Learn more about 100RC at 

1 2

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y     «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 3

 O‘ahu: Resilience Context

O‘ahu: 
Resilience 
Context

The concept of resilience is not 
new to the people and communities 
of O‘ahu. Driven by distance and 
isolation, islands have long been in-
cubators of innovation, pioneers of 
self-sufficiency, and builders of strong 
social capital. 

Sitting at the center of the blue continent nearly 2,400 
miles away from the nearest landmass, the commu-
nities of Hawai‘i are the most isolated human popula-
tion on Earth. The Native Hawaiian population that 
thrived for a thousand years on O‘ahu made resilience 
into a high artform. Land division by ahupua‘a reflect-
ed equity and balanced access to natural resources, 
ensuring resilience for each community. Konohiki 
stewarded fresh water, fisheries, and other finite 
resources with an eye to future sustainability for the 
community rather than immediate exploitation
The arc of O‘ahu’s resilience narrative grew 
 
more complex through the 19th century as the 
Hawaiian monarchy wrestled with western influ-
ence and the Native Hawaiian population steeply 
declined. Through a time of change, Ali‘i leaders 
made O‘ahu one of the most literate populations on 
the planet and electrified ‘Iolani Palace before the 

IN MANY WAYS, THIS 
RESILIENCE STRATEGY 
RECOGNIZES THAT O‘AHU 
MUST RETURN TO OUR 
TRADITIONAL VALUES OF 
EQUITY AND RESPONSIBLE 
STEWARDSHIP

White House, but also witnessed the decline of 
traditional communities through a devastating 
sandalwood trade and the transfer of land to 
private ownership. At the close of the 1800s, 
colonialism and a political overthrow by foreign 
business interests set the stage for an era of 
plantation agriculture and an export economy 
that in many ways still defines power on O‘ahu. 
 
The City and County of Honolulu was estab-
lished by charter in 1907, and from its founding 
served as a cultural crossroads between tradi-
tional Hawaiian culture, European influences, 
and immigrants from Asia. This lively exchange 
on the streets of Honolulu and in sugar planta-
tion housing fostered a unique sense of humor, 
a spirit of collaboration, and deep cross-cultural 
ties. In the 1970s, the Hawaiian renaissance 
brought traditional cultural values and a broadly 
shared value of aloha ‘āina back into the center 
of O‘ahu’s story, deeply shaping a constitutional 
convention that gave Hawai‘i and O‘ahu one of 
the most progressive state constitutions in the 
country. 

1 4

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y     «

Photo by Elyse Butler

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 5

 O‘ahu: Resilience Context 

O‘ahu: Resilience Context   

 
In our current day, however, the 
expansion of the global economy and 
O‘ahu’s isolation has resulted in a 
situation of dependence rather than 
resilience. Every four days 400 shipping 
containers arrive at Honolulu Harbor 
to supply the 992,605 residents of our 
island. Ninety percent of our food and 
fuel is imported, and even our local 
housing stock is increasingly purchased 
by offshore dollars. Hawai‘i has the 
highest cost of living and housing prices 
in the United States and despite recent 
progress, O‘ahu continues to have the 
highest per-capita homeless rate in the 
nation. In many ways, this Resilience 
Strategy recognizes that O‘ahu must 
return to our traditional values of equity 
and responsible stewardship if we are 
to continue to thrive as a close-knit 
island community. While the looming 
challenges of the 21st century—climate 
change, income inequality, and resource 
scarcity—clearly pose resilience issues 
for all countries, cities, and commu-
nities, they are pronounced for us as 
island residents. 
 
Due to our eclectic history, the 
O‘ahu community is as vibrant and 
diverse as any city in the United States, 
and perhaps anywhere in the world. 
We are accepting and welcoming of 
diversity—20 percent of residents were 
born outside the U.S. and 25 percent 
speak a language other than English 
at home. Honolulu is also profoundly 
multiethnic with the highest population 
percentage of multiracial individuals 
(24 percent) in the nation as compared 

Photo by Elyse Butler

to a national average of 3 percent, and our island has no ethnic 
group in the majority. Our culture of diversity, while imperfect 
and not without fault lines, is our strongest asset. Built on the 
Hawaiian foundational value of aloha, a society that promotes 
inclusion, equity, and respect for differences is an integral part 
of our collective identity and our most important element of 
resilience.
  We are also unique from an infrastructure and operations 
standpoint, given that we are one of the few “city and county” 
combined jurisdictions in the nation. Honolulu is the 11th 
largest municipality in the United States, with nearly 600 
square miles and nearly one million residents under its juris-
diction. But we are not just a large city, we are also a network of 
small towns, rural communities, and farms from Wai‘anae to 
Waimānalo. Every single one of us, however, is part of the same 
island society that stands to bear the brunt of 21st century 
challenges. We have to simultaneously move like a major city, 
while thinking like a small island.

Developing 
O‘ahu’s 
Resilience 
Strategy
This Resilience Strategy 
was written by our communi-
ty. Over an 18-month period 
grassroots residents and com-
munity leaders helped shape 
and craft the 44 resilience 
actions that form the body of 
this strategy and lay a path to 
a resilient future for O‘ahu. 
 
The effort kicked off with a 
meeting of over 140 island leaders 
in the summer of 2017 from the 
for-profit, nonprofit, and govern-
mental sectors. The Resilience 
Office then visited all 33 neighbor-
hood boards on O‘ahu, engaged with 
219 organizations, and received 
direct survey input from more than 
2,300 individuals representing a 
range of Honolulu’s geographical, 
ethnic, gender, and age diversity.  
 
Over 70 percent of the surveys 
and input were collected live and 
in-person with island residents, 
and during the peak of engagement 
from October 2017-March 2018, 
the Resilience Office averaged more 
than one public outreach meeting 
per day. These grassroots perspec-
tives and concerns on resilience 

Community Input

Agenda Setting
Workshop

140+

Stakeholders 
from 19 sectors 
representing 
117 unique 
organizations

+2,200

Resilience Perception
Surveys Conducted

33	

	

Neighborhood	
Board	Presentations

219	 Meetings	with	other

Stakeholder	Groups

	

On a scale of 1-10 
(low – high), how 
resilient do you think 
O‘ahu is today?

3.9

Resilience 
Office, Com-
munity Climate 
Action 
Planning at 
Āliamanu 
Middle School

Photo
credit: 
Resilience 
Office

1 6

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

» r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 7

 O‘ahu: Resilience Context 

O‘ahu: Resilience Context   

directly led to the selection of four key areas that ul-
timately formed the basis of the Resilience Strategy: 
reducing the long-term cost of living; natural di-
saster preparation; blunting the impacts of climate 
change; and, leveraging the power of community.
 
Utilizing the City Resilience Framework tool 
developed by 100RC, our resilience survey resulted 
in a clear prioritization of three areas of profound 
resilience challenge and one area of clear strength 
for O‘ahu. These four areas became the central four 
pillars of our strategy
  
The confluence of these factors identified by our 
residents affirm our “informal” definition: resilience 
is where the environment and economy meet. 
 
Office asked nearly 90 community representatives, 
leaders, and experts from outside of the City to 
volunteer their time to drill down on the four critical 

In the Summer of 2018, the City’s Resilience 

O‘ahu Resilience Strategy Phases

areas and come up with “outside the box” solutions 
that could be implemented by the City and accel-
erate our progress to be a more resilient commu-
nity. Over the span of four months and dozens of 
meetings, 195 actions were proposed, researched, 
weighed and vetted by the working groups until 49 
of the strongest and most impactful remained.
 
In January of 2019, these community-driven re-
silience actions were reviewed, strengthened, com-
bined, and then endorsed both by an internal City 
Resilience Team comprised of 15 key department 
directors, and ultimately by the Resilience Strategy 
Steering Committee—a group of 21 Executive Direc-
tors, CEO’s and other organizational leaders whose 
partnership with the City is critical to implement 
every single one of the 44 grassroots ideas that ulti-
mately emerged to form our path to resilience.

PHASE I

July 2017

Strategy
Kick-off

May 2018

O‘ahu-wide 
Community 
Assessment & 

Outreach

Focus
Area

Identification

Preliminary
Resilience
Assessment

Research Approach & Work Plan Development

PHASE II

Working
Groups
Kick-off

Story,

Research,
& Analysis

Action

Development
& Prioritization

August 2018

1 8

Resilience
Strategy

May 2019

City Resilience
Framework
The City Resilience Framework (CRF), 
developed by Arup and The Rockefeller Founda-
tion, identifies 12 drivers of resilient cities across 
the areas of health and wellbeing, economy and 
society, infrastructure and environment, and 
leadership and strategy. We used this tool to assess 
current initiatives and understand various city 

systems’ ability to cope with shocks and stresses. 
Additionally, engagement and survey materials 
were designed to gather resilience perceptions 
relative to the CRF and were consistent across 
the broad and diverse individuals and organiza-
tions who contributed to the development of the 
strategy. The tool enabled us to broaden resilience 
thinking on O‘ahu beyond disaster preparedness 
and recovery and ensure that the initiatives iden-
tified will make the best ongoing contribution to 
building the island’s resilience.

Photos by 
(clockwise from top right) 
Philip Rasca, Department of 
Parks & Recreation, Resilience 
Office, Resilience Office

1 9

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.org O‘ahu: Resilience Context 

O‘ahu: Resilience Context   

Island 
Perceptions 

The remarkable element of this process was 
not just the level of commitment, dedication, and 
time that hundreds of island residents volun-
teered to put into the strategy—we are, after 
all, a tight-knit community. It was the shocking 
consistency among diverse groups in survey 

after survey about shared perceptions of the 
top vulnerabilities for our island, and a strong 
correlation around the priority and urgent need 
to address these vulnerabilities. Island residents 
from Kāhala to Kahuku sense a threat to our 
island, and want to see action.

Surveys revealed 
that across all sec-
tors, O‘ahu resi-
dents have shared 
perceptions of the 
top vulnerabilities 
for our island, and 
a strong correlation 
around the priority 
and urgent need to 
address these vul-
nerabilities.

Government

Business

NGO/Non-profit

Individual

Resilience 
Challenges

Our formal definition for “resilience” in the 
formation of this strategy is “the ability to sur-
vive, adapt and thrive regardless of what shocks or 
stresses come our way.” 
 
Public perceptions around O‘ahu’s top shocks 
(events which occur rapidly and unexpectedly) and 
stresses (on-going strains on society that gradually 
sap community strength) formed the basis of how 
to frame our resilience challenges. Consistently, in-
dividuals and groups ranked O‘ahu’s top five shocks 
as: Hurricane; Tsunami; Infrastructure Failure; 
Rainfall Flooding; and, External Economic Crisis. 
Just as consistently, island residents ranked O‘ahu’s 
top five stresses as: Cost of Living; Aging Infrastruc-
ture; Climate Change Impacts; Lack of Affordable 
Housing; and, Over-Reliance on Imports .

Photo credit: Hawai‘i Sea 
Grant King Tides Project

A king tide floods an area in Mapuna-
puna, Āhua Street between Kilihau and 
‘Awa‘awaloa Streets

Top 5 Shocks

Hurricane (77%)

Tsunami (51%)

Top 5 Stresses

Cost of Living (50%)

Aging Infrastructure (50%)

Infrastructure Failure (37%)

Climate Change Impacts (47%)

Rainfall Flooding (29%)

Lack of Affordable Housing (40%)

External Economic Crisis (29%)

Over-reliance on Imports (24%)

Engaged stakeholders’ responses to the questions “Identify your top three shocks/
stresses?” Percentages indicate the percent of respondents who selected that 
shock or stress within their top three.

2 0

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

2 1

Resilience 
Actions

and the necessary resources to support commu-
nity-based priorities?
 
This Resilience Strategy provides specific, 
concrete actions that answer these questions 
with real solutions. Yes, we can and will come 
together to find ways to remain rooted with our 
families, bounce forward after disasters, an-
swer the climate change challenge, and affirm 
our community bonds to write a new chapter in 
O‘ahu’s resilience story. 

OUR ABILITY TO MOVE 
THE NEEDLE ON THESE 
RESILIENCE CHANGES 
WILL PROFOUNDLY 
INFLUENCE THE FUTURE 
OF O‘AHU

 O‘ahu: Resilience Context 

As an island community, Honolulu residents 

For the first time in our state history, our 
population dropped three years in a row as 
housing costs continue to rise and force local 
residents to relocate. The local economy remains 
reliant on a tourism oriented service industry 
where jobs do not pay a living wage to match 
the high cost of living. Our reliance on imported 
energy keeps us exposed to price volatility, high 
monthly utility bills, and large annual transpor-
tation costs. 
 
are acutely aware of vulnerabilities to climate 
change and we are now living through the conse-
quences – busy tropical cyclone seasons, heavy 
rainfall following prolonged drought, warmer 
oceans and bleaching coral, and eroding beaches 
and high tide flooding, to name a few. The cost 
of living and environmental stresses take a toll 
on our community ties. As demographics shift, 
there is a need to ensure that new residents mov-
ing in next door are able to acculturate to O‘ahu 
and live respectfully alongside kama‘āina to keep 
our community bonds strong. 
 
resilience challenges will profoundly influence 
the future of O‘ahu. Residents know that the 
twin threats of cost of living and climate-driven 
natural disaster pose existential questions about 
livability for the long run. Will local residents 
and our children be able to afford to remain 
on-island?  How many of us will be displaced in 
the wake a major natural disaster? Can we con-
tinue to have a culture of connection to the land 
and ocean if, for instance, beaches disappear and 
shorelines become inaccessible? Is our com-
munity connectivity strong enough to embrace 
newcomers while maintaining our traditional 
values? Will local government lead with courage 

Our ability to move the needle on these 

2 2

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

Photo by Elyse Butler

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

2 3

 Resilience Actions
 Pillars
 Appendicies

How 
to Read
an 
Action

The Resilience Strategy 
includes four pillars, 12 goals, and 
44 actions for our community, 
partners, and the City to 
implement.  

Pillars          Goals          Actions

ACTION DESCRIPTION
Each description presents specific policies 
or programs the City and its partners will 
deploy to help achieve resilience goals, as 
well as important context that explains why 
the Action is needed. 

RESILIENCE CO-BENEFITS
Demonstrates how the action has multiple benefits 
to make O‘ahu stronger and better able to withstand 
multiple shocks and stresses. 

Pillar III  CLIM ATE SECURITY

u

GOAL 2:  Clean Ground Transportation

Action    25

Accelerate Carbon-Free New Mobility Options 

u The cost of transportation is 34 percent higher for O‘ahu residents than the national average. Micro-
mobility has the potential to vastly reduce transportation expenses and greenhouse gas pollution on O‘ahu. 
In 2017 there were 786,382 registered vehicles for Honolulu’s driving-aged population of 781,033. This 
collection of cars, vans, pickups and other trucks, and motorcycles and mopeds outnumbers the amount of 
people who can operate them. More than 80 percent of these vehicles are single occupancy vehicles (SOVs) 
and approximately 90 percent gasoline-powered. For local commutes, 67 percent of commuters drive 
SOVs, while 14 percent carpool, 7 percent use public transit, 5 percent walk, 5 percent work at home, and 4 
percent use other means of travel. Due to our island geography, land-use patterns, and concentration of jobs 
in the primary urban core, the proliferation of SOVs leads to traffic congestion and commute times that are 
among the worst in the nation. Ground transportation produces 20 percent of our greenhouse gas pollution 
on island. This takes a toll not only on our quality-of-life, health, and well-being, but also on our wallets.  

To address these issues, the City is committed to Transit-Oriented Development along the new 20-mile, 
21-station rail transit system, and aims to develop a Carbon-Free Corridor to maximize clean and sustain-
able new mobility options for residents and commuters. The City will: 

 
 
 
 
 

• Convene a New Mobility Working Group to implement a network of clean and sustainable 
    micromobility options such as e-scooters, bike share, car share, and other dockless technologies. 
• Identify opportunities to increase service in areas that would result in significant reductions in 
   personal vehicle use, as well as improved transit access to high-need populations (e.g., based on age, 
   economics, and equity). 

The Administration will develop a transportation demand management policy which will include provi-
sions for carpool/vanpool and bicycle parking, trip reduction plans, and transit-supportive infrastructure 
development. The City will implement TOD strategies that require developers to provide connectivity and 
streetscape improvements in return for bonus height and density waivers. The City will develop a single 
transit “wayfaring app” to simplify route choice as well as a tap card to facilitate payment and transfers 
across all modes of transit. The City will also increase the amount of protected bike lanes by 40 percent 
over the next four years, which will serve as a safe conduit for not only bikes but multiple new micromobili-
ty options for island residents.

8 2

R E S I L I E N T   O ‘ A H U   S T R A T E G Y    «

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Implementing new mobility options 
will improve affordability and reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions by providing 
zero emission low-cost transportation 
as a viable alternative to fossil-fueled 
SOVs. It will save time for residents by 
reducing congestion and time searching 
for parking; improve air quality, health 
and well-being; and re-connect com-
munities with each other and our island 
home. It will empower residents and 
improve our economy by conveniently 
and affordably connecting housing to 
job opportunities, especially in our 
primary urban core.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Transportation Services, DDC, DFM, DIT, 
DPP, HART, Resilience Office, Elemental Excelerator 

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge    UN SDG

CLEAN ENERGY

CLIMATE ACTION

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

Performance Metrics
• Increased public transit mode share
• Increased number of bus passes/Holo passes 
  purchased 
•  Reduced commute times and congestion

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

O‘ahu Residents Want to Bike
After only six months in operation, Biki 
Bikeshare in Honolulu was the 8th most 
heavily used bikeshare system in the 
U.S. In its first year alone, Biki users 
logged 838,662 total rides—64 percent 
of which were by O‘ahu residents. In 
2018 that number kept rising, with users 
logging in more than 1 million rides at 
2.8 rides per bike per day, compared to 
the industry average of 1.7. Biki riders 
report other perks: 27 percent lost 
weight and eight percent reduced their 
cost of living by eliminating a car from 
their household. As of May 2019, Biki 
was named the 6th most used bikeshare 
system in the nation. It’s clear that Biki’s 
success is happening despite poor bik-
ing infrastructure. On that note, among 
large cities, Honolulu ranked 16th out of 
18 for “ease of travel” by bicycle. Resi-
dent ratings for ease of travel by bicycle 

are also lower than the national bench-
mark. O'ahu needs a significantly expanded 
bicycle network to meet the micromobility 
demands of our residents.

Photo credit: Bikeshare Hawai‘i

»   1 0 0   R E S I L I E N T   C I T I E S

8 3

Resilience Actions     

PARTNERS
Implementation partners include key public, pri-
vate, nonprofit and civic collaborators that will 
advance the Resilience Strategy actions in the 
years ahead. Partnership is not exclusive and 
meant to be a starting point. The lead agency 
or partner spearheading the action is in bold. As 
presented in the Resilience Strategy, partners 
currently only represent government agencies 
and organizations represented on the Steering 
Committee. We look forward to more partner 
collaboration ahead!

TIMEFRAME
The timeframe for implementing each action 
is identified as Immediate (0-1 years), Short-
term (1-2 years), Mid-term (2-5 years), and 
Long-term (5+ years). 

ALOHA+ CHALLENGE
The Aloha+ Challenge sustainability goal(s) 
that aligns with this action. 
For more information, visit aloha-challenge.
hawaiigreengrowth.org

UN SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS
The United Nations Sustainable Development 
Goal(s) that aligns with this action. 
For more information, visit 
sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgs

MEASURES OF SUCCESS
Quantitative ways to measure progress 
toward the goal, which can be measured on a 
regular basis.  

SPOTLIGHT
A global or local example, or an idea that can 
further resilience on O‘ahu.   

2 4
2 4

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y     «

2 5

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.orgPillar I.

Remaining 
Rooted

Ensuring an Affordable Future 
for Our Island
 Building resilience on O‘ahu is directly related to maintaining 
continuity of our community. For the first time since statehood both 
the entire state and O‘ahu’s populations declined for two consecutive 
years. This outmigration of local families and Honolulu’s struggle with 
homelessness are directly tied to affordability and opportunity. The cost of 
living in Honolulu is 24.4 percent above the national average and according 
to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, a family of four 
on O‘ahu who brings in $93,300 or less per year (or a single person earning 
less than $65,350 per year) should be considered “low income.”

While Honolulu’s unemployment rate 
is a low 2.3 percent, a 2017 study by 
the United Way found that 46 percent 
of employed households are asset 
limited and income constrained, 
meaning they may hold multiple jobs 
to make ends meet, but still live pay-
check to paycheck. The bottom line 
is that O‘ahu’s families are stretched 
thin—both in terms of finances and 
the ability to spend time together. It 
also means our families are highly 
vulnerable to shocks in the economy 
or natural environment, with little 
or no safety net to help them through 
emergencies. O‘ahu residents identi-
fied cost of living as the number one 
vulnerability and “stress” undermin-
ing long-term resilience in our com-
munity.
 
The prime driver of the high cost of living is 
Honolulu’s sky-high housing costs. The median 
price to purchase a single-family home in 2018 hit 
$795,000 and the median price of condominiums 
was $400,000. According to one calculation, an 
annual income of at least $153,520 is needed to 
afford the average single-family home in Hawai‘i in 
2019, while the median 2018 income in Honolulu 
was only $96,000. Meanwhile, the average hourly 
wage needed to afford a two-bedroom apartment 
on O‘ahu is $32.50—the highest in the nation—but 
the average renter’s wage in Hawai‘i is only $13.64.  
While there are many reasons for the high price of 
housing, a few key drivers include limited supply; 
strong demand from real estate purchases from 
buyers outside of O‘ahu; high City and state regula-
tory bars for residential developments and permits; 
high costs for imported building materials; and 
other factors such as the impact of parking costs 

on housing prices and high energy costs. Another 
major factor is the recent explosion of short-term 
vacation rentals. In 2014, there were 4,411 individ-
ually-advertised vacation rental units (“VRUs”) on 
O‘ahu. In 2018, the Department of Planning and 
Permitting estimated that there are 8,000-10,000 
VRU’s on O‘ahu, meaning more than one out of ev-
ery 30 homes on island is now unavailable to local 
residents. Not only has this trend reduced our local 
housing, it has also driven up the price of housing. 
According to a recent report, a 10 percent increase 
in on-line VRU listings led to a  0.4 percent increase 
in rental prices and a 0.76 percent increase in home 
prices.

O‘ahu suffers from a specific lack of affordable 
housing inventory. As of 2017, O‘ahu was short 
some 24,000 housing units, and 75 percent of those 
were needed in affordable housing ranges. While 
the City has recently re-established a program 
to refurbish and build publicly-owned affordable 
units, much more inventory is needed for individ-
uals and families in low- and moderate-income 
brackets. This effort also helps support the City’s 
“housing first” policy to address homelessness 
on O‘ahu, a strategy that has found some success. 
While the City will continue to pursue innovative 
new policies like building hygiene centers and 
implementing “lift zones” in conjunction with the 
Honolulu Police Department to help homelessness 
issues, long-term resilience requires that housing 
stock be available to our residents—a prime focus 
of our Resilience Actions.  

Along with housing, O‘ahu residents also spend 
more for transportation and utilities than the 
national average. Affordability needs to be com-
plemented by economic opportunity for resi-
dents. With high energy costs, O‘ahu has a unique 
opportunity to open up an innovation economy that 

2 6

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y     «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

2 7

drives down energy costs and incubates 
solutions that create employment and 
exports technology to the rest of the 
globe. Leveraging established part-
ners in the field, the City can foster an 
alternative to the two dominant eco-
nomic engines of tourism and military 
spending that are highly sensitive and 
dependent on external factors. 

In response to these challenges, the City and 
an array of implementing partners will take 
the following actions:

GOAL 1
Supporting Affordable Housing Development
Action 1   Reduce Empty Homes and Increase 
 

Affordable Housing Funding

Action 2  Return Illegal Vacation Rental Units 
 

to Local Housing

Action 3  Develop Alternative, Affordable 
 

Housing Options for O‘ahu Residents

Action 4 
 

Action 5 
 
 

Expand Affordable Housing Funding by 
Implementing Progressive Property Taxes

Implement a Guaranteed Security 
Program to Support Local Home 
Ownership

GOAL 2
Reducing Additional Cost Burdens 
Action 6 
 
 

Expand Housing and Energy 
Transformationby Accelerating 
the Permitting Process

Action 7  Reduce Utility Costs for Residents 
 

through Transparency and Disclosure

Action 8 
 

Increase Housing Affordability by 
Reducing Parking Requirements

GOAL 3
Improving   Economic Opportunity
Action 9 
 
 

Foster an Innovation Economy through 
the City’s Office of Economic 
Development

Action 10  Promote New Agricultural Models 
 

for Economic and Food Security

2 8

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

2 9

Pillar I.  REM AINI N G  R OOT ED

u

G OAL  1 :  Supporting Affordable Housing Development

Action     1

Reduce Empty Homes and Increase 
Affordable Housing Funding

u Given our extraordinarily high housing costs,  housing units should not sit empty—adding to Hono-
lulu’s housing supply shortage and high rental rates. Honolulu’s median rent for two- and three-bedroom 
units is the highest in the nation at $1,528 and $2,408, respectively. These high rents are particularly dam-
aging for the 46 percent of O‘ahu households that struggle to afford basic needs. O‘ahu’s long-term vacancy 
rate of 5.3 percent and available vacancy rate of 3.4 percent are among the highest in the nation. Our high 
cost-of-living and rents are significantly exacerbated by a lack of affordable housing supply and a current 
focus on the development of higher-end investment properties, many of which do not serve as primary 
residences and remain vacant for significant portions of the year. 

Foreign investment in high-end second homes has skyrocketed from ~$500 million per year from 2008 to 
2015 to ~$1 billion per year for 2016 and 2017. Continental investors purchase another $4 to 5 billion each 
year in Hawai‘i’s real estate market.  While this investment brings economic benefits and drives topline 
growth, these benefits need to be weighed against the costs associated with price inflation and limited 
supply of affordable housing for permanent residents, not only for vulnerable or low- to moderate-income 
residents, but also for middle class workers who support O‘ahu’s top industry: tourism.

Following Vancouver, British Columbia’s innovative lead, the City will implement an annual fee on the as-
sessed value of any residential properties that are left empty for more than six months of any given tax year. 
Consistently vacant units impose a direct cost burden on the City, which ends up underwriting the building 
of new additional infrastructure for other housing development to make up for under-utilized properties. 
The primary objectives of the Vacancy Fee are to: 1) encourage the return of empty or under-used prop-
erties to active use as long-term rental stock for residents of O‘ahu; and, 2) provide a source of dedicated 
funds to directly support the development of affordable housing units throughout O‘ahu. Successful im-
plementation of the Vacancy Fee at a simple 1 percent figure akin to Vancouver’s rate could encourage the 
provision of approximately 10,000 new rental units on island or provide approximately $60 million per year 
for affordable housing.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Vacant properties have  multiple impacts on 
a community beyond preventing housing units 
from being available to local residents, including 
depressed business generation for local shops, 
increased squatting and public safety issues 
including fires, and decreased property values 
surrounding vacant properties. Opening vacant 
units for active rental and use has benefits 
that extend from increasing social equity and 
neighborhood connections, to making housing 
more affordable as the supply increases versus 
demand, and reducing the need for costly addi-
tional infrastructure to build new developments 
outside of current urban areas by simply taking 
advantage of the living spaces already built and 
on existing infrastructure systems.

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Office of Housing, BFS, DCS, DLM, DPP, Hawai‘i 
Community Foundation

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge    UN SDG
 

 

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

REDUCED
INEQUALITIES

Performance Metrics
• % reduction in Honolulu’s overall housing 
  vacancy rate
• New affordable housing units supported 
   by new fee revenue  

3 0

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

3 1

Photo by Garrett Gee

Vancouver’s Empty Homes Tax
The City of Vancouver passed an “Empty Homes Tax” in 2016 with a goal of increasing the 
amount of funds available to affordable housing initiatives and encourages owners to make 
empty units available. It’s already showing signs of success: the number of properties declared 
vacant fell by 15 percent from 2017 to 2018, and 53 percent of those properties are now back 
on the rental market. 

Pillar I.  REM AINI N G  R OOT ED

u

G OAL  1 :  Supporting Affordable Housing Development

Action     2

Return Illegal Vacation Rental Units 
to Local Housing

u In response to O‘ahu’s housing crisis,  this action addresses the rampant proliferation of unlawful 
short-term vacation rental units (VRUs) on our island. With the average vacation rental bringing in about 
3.5 times more rental revenue than a regular rental arrangement with local residents, the number of short-
term rentals have skyrocketed in recent years. Based on on-line advertising, there are an estimated 8,000-
10,000 short-term rentals on O‘ahu, meaning that nearly one of every 30 housing units on the island is not 
available for local resident housing needs. On the North Shore of O‘ahu, data indicates that as much as 1 in 4 
housing units is now being illegally rented for the vacation market. Not only has this trend reduced long-
term housing stock for our island residents, it has also driven up the price of housing, directly increasing 
our cost of living. According to a recent report, a 10 percent increase in Airbnb listings led to a 0.4 percent 
increase in rental prices and a 0.76 percent increase in home prices. In addition, an estimated 52 percent of 
short-term rental units in Hawai‘i are owned by nonresidents, suggesting that it is mainly out of state inves-
tors that reap the income benefits. A recent study in San Francisco estimates that the city’s local economy 
suffers a net loss of $300,000 per short-term rental per year. 

The City will amend current short-term rental policies to curb the most negative effects of illegal short-
term rental proliferation to our economy and neighborhoods while also allowing for certain uses that 
are clearly beneficial to local homeowners and residents. An effective short-term rental ordinance must 
include the following: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

•  Hold platforms (e.g., Airbnb, VRBO, etc.) liable for illegal transactions on their website
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Require platforms to provide data on VRUs to City
Impose meaningful fines for offenders 
Focus on bringing major offenders and commercial hosts into compliance
Ensure appropriate and commensurate revenue is collected by the City
Empower neighboring residents
Limit the number of units a host may offer for rent and nights a unit may be rented
Prohibit VRUs from operating in inappropriate types of housing
Provide clear restrictions on Non-Conforming Units
Place restrictions on out-of-state investors and VRU owners

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Planning and Permitting, BFS, 
Aloha United Way, Pacific Resource Partnership, 
Hawai‘i Community Foundation, Hawai‘i Appleseed 
Center for Law and Economic Justice

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge    UN SDG
 

 

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

NO POVERTY

Performance Metrics
• Reduction in number of active on-line listings 
   of illegal short-term rental units on O‘ahu 
• Increase in tax revenue to City from legally-
   operated VRU’s

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Resilience co-benefits include:  reduces 
natural disaster vulnerability due to the in-
creased burden on residents who have to care 
for stranded visitors utilizing short-term rent-
als; increases City revenue for park upkeep, 
road maintenance, and affordable housing 
through fines and tax revenue that were 
previously evaded; preserves and protects 
social fabric of neighborhoods by ensuring 
that long-term renters and owners know each 
other instead of having transient visitors or 
empty houses in neighborhoods; increases local 
housing supply by removing illegal short-term 
units from market.

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

A collapsed house 
near the beach at 
Hanalei Bay, Kaua‘i

Photo credit: Kevin Kodama, 
NWS Honolulu Forecast 
Office

The community of Hanalei, Kaua‘i documented the significant burden that a high concentration 
of vacation rentals can impose on local residents in the wake of a disaster. For instance, perma-
nent residents with resources and social ties bond together to restore infrastructure and clean 
up, while unprepared visitors do not have the support of a hotel or other institutional systems 
and will rely on an already weakened community for assistance.

3 2

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

3 3

Pillar I.  REM AINI N G  R OOT ED

u

G OAL  1 :  Supporting Affordable Housing Development

Action     3

Develop Alternative, Affordable Housing 
Options for O‘ahu Residents

u The basic lack of affordable housing  units on O‘ahu is a clear threat to the sustainability and resil-
iency of our island community. Causes include a shortage of housing inventory, an incentive structure that 
leads developers to construct high-end properties, a high percentage of existing inventory used as vacation 
rentals and vacation homes, and high construction costs. In addition, according to the recently released 
Aloha United Way ALICE study, wages for local residents have not kept pace with soaring costs, which ad-
ditionally limits housing options. The cost of living is particularly high in the urban core of Honolulu, which 
leads residents to relocate to marginally more affordable suburban neighborhoods, thereby increasing 
commuting time, distance, and associated transportation costs while leading to urban sprawl. 

With Honolulu’s rail system set to begin limited operations in 2020 and robust complementary Tran-
sit-Oriented Development (TOD) plans under way and new federal programs such as the Opportunity Zone 
program, there is a tremendous opportunity to increase both the stock and the type of affordable housing 
offered to residents. Increasing affordable housing inventory along transit lines will enable more families 
and vulnerable communities to secure stable housing and increase their access to jobs, goods, and services 
in the vital urban core. However, this building opportunity should not be limited to traditional housing unit 
arrangements.

The City will work to create more housing options for residents including: (1) Expanding Honolulu’s land-
use policy to allow for more shared housing and cooperative models in TOD zones; (2) Developing shared 
living residences for seniors in TOD zones that would provide affordable housing with community centers 
connected to rail stations and other services; (3) Further encouraging the building of Accessory Dwelling 
Units (ADUs) by undertaking a marketing campaign, improving the ADU permitting process, and remov-
ing financial impediments to ADU construction; (4) Supporting the building of a pilot pocket community, 
which could have multiple dwelling units with central shared dining and bathroom facilities; and (5) sup-
porting additional culturally appropriate housing models, such as kauhale.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
In addition to increasing housing  supply 
and providing support for Honolulu’s “Hous-
ing First” approach to address homelessness, 
building new models of affordable housing 
in TOD zones will support greenhouse gas 
mitigation goals by getting people out of their 
cars, and reducing commute time which 
decreases overall emissions. Building along 
the transportation corridors will also foster 
community connectivity and resilience by 
allowing residents to spend less time in the 
car and more time with family and communi-
ty. Finally, building at greater density across 
all alternative models will curb urban sprawl, 
which is good for ecosystems, agriculture, and 
preserving green space.

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Community Services, HOU, Aloha 
United Way, Hawai‘i Community Foundation

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge    UN SDG
 

 

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

INDUSTRY, INNOVATION 
AND ARCHITECTURE

Performance Metrics
• Number of new ADUs constructed
• Total number of shared housing units constructed 

3 4

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

3 5

Kauhale
The kauhale concept is rooted in the traditional Native Hawaiian model with a 
cluster of houses surrounding communal areas for cooking, eating, and washing. 
A similar, plantation-style community was most recently promoted at Kahauiki 
Village near Ke‘ehi Lagoon, where clustered development allows for more hous-
ing and shared spaces. 

Photo by 
Aaron Yoshino

Pillar I.  REM AINI N G  R OOT ED

u

G OAL  1 :  Supporting Affordable Housing Development

Action     4

Expand Affordable Housing Funding by 
Implementing Progressive Property Taxes

u At 0.28 percent, Hawai‘i has  one of the lowest property tax rates in the country, which acts as an un-
intended incentive for non-residents to invest in real estate on O‘ahu, driving up the market prices for local 
residents. Having the lowest property tax rate in the country worsens the City’s resilience in two major 
ways: (1) it increases overall home prices, because low tax rates attract investment and more money can go 
towards the purchase price; and (2) it deprives the City of the financial resources needed to provide afford-
able housing and implement other projects aimed at building a resilient 21st century city.

With one of the lowest property tax rates in the country and rising offshore ownership of high-end prop-
erties, a progressive taxation model can help redistribute property tax burdens. Median home prices and 
rents in Honolulu are the highest in the nation and 46 percent of O‘ahu’s households have difficulty meeting 
basic needs. Affordability is one of Honolulu’s greatest resilience challenges. Meanwhile, foreign and 
continental U.S. property investment is booming. While this drives significant economic benefits, it also 
has costs and exacerbates affordable housing and other issues. Although the low property tax rate in part 
reflects the higher average property values on O‘ahu, the underlying dynamics outlined above continue to 
have an adverse impact on resilience.

Shifting to a progressive property tax would help address both of these issues—retaining a low property tax 
rate for residents least able to pay, increasing the rate for property classes most likely to be the subject of 
offshore and absentee investment, and increasing revenue for the City to devote to the provision of af-
fordable housing and other critical City services. For example, if an effective Residential A Tier 2 tax rate, 
imposed on assessed value on any valuation higher than $1 million, was increased from the current 0.90 
percent to a range between a 1.19 percent (national average) and a 2.38 percent effective tax rate (highest in 
the nation New Jersey rate) was enacted, the City could potentially raise an additional $24 million to $119 
million a year while maintaining the exact same property tax rates on a majority of homeowners on island. 
Exemptions should be provided under certain circumstances.

Additional taxes generated could be used to fund the construction of affordable rentals targeting 60 percent 
of the area median income and below, using either City or State funding instruments, such as the Rental 
Housing Revolving Fund.

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
A progressive tax structure will 
dampen upward price pressure on 
housing and rents, and create a source 
of funds for affordable housing and 
other equity enhancing measures. It 
will increase the supply of productive 
land that can go to housing and thus 
the supply of housing. Such a fee can 
also help close a growing equity gap 
between wealthy and working class 
residents on O‘ahu.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Budget and Fiscal Services, DCS, DLM, 
Aloha United Way, Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law and 
Economic Justice, Hawai‘i Community Foundation 

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge     UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

REDUCED
INEQUALITIES

Performance Metrics
• Increase in equity in baseline cost of living 
   percentage across income classes
• Increase in City and County of Honolulu revenue 
   for affordable housing

Distrubution of Property Wealth in British 
Columbia by Net Worth Quintile, 2012

Share of VALUE of 
principal residences

Share of NET WORTH
of principal residences

Surging housing prices 
exacerbate inequali-
ty and widen the gap 
between rich and poor. 
For example in Vancou-
ver, the top 20 percent 
of the population in 
terms of net worth own 
68 percent of housing 
value, and the bottom 60 
percent of the population 
owns only 9 percent. 
When property prices 
rise—as they have in 
Vancouver and Hono-
lulu—then more value 
accrues to the wealthy 
while making it increas-
ingly difficult for the poor 
to afford housing at all.

Graphic adapted 
from Marc Lee

l

s
d
o
h
s
u
o
H
 
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

 

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

Bottom

Second

Third

Fourth

Top

Net Worth Quintile

3 6

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

3 7

Pillar I.  REM AINI N G  R OOT ED

u

G OAL  1 :  Supporting Affordable Housing Development

Action     5

Implement a Guaranteed Security Program 
to Support Local Home Ownership

u High housing costs  not only make home ownership more difficult for the working class, in many 
cases coming up with a rental security deposit can be out of reach, especially for young workers. Forty-six 
percent of O‘ahu’s households have difficulty meeting basic needs with about 10 percent officially living in 
poverty. Meanwhile, the high cost of living serves as a major hurdle to local residents to save up enough for 
both rental security deposits and down payments for housing purchase. 

The City has an active program that grants eligible residents 0 percent interest loans toward a down 
payment on their first homes (Honolulu Down Payment Loan Program); however this program is often 
over-subscribed and is not available to renters—who constitute the lion’s share of those in need of assis-
tance. A Bonded Security Deposit Program can address both the needs of renters initially struggling to 
save enough for a security deposit and simultaneously allow them to build equity towards a future home 
purchase. 

The City will explore the potential to work with a nonprofit partner to administer the program and iden-
tify federal, state, and local private foundation funding sources. The nonprofit partner would essentially 
guarantee the security deposit to a landlord up front, while allowing the renter to slowly contribute to 
and build up the security deposit balance through monthly contributions. The balance would be accruing 
interest and growing under the management of the nonprofit. Assuming the security deposit isn’t actually 
needed at the time of move-out, the deposit can be carried over and used for the next rental, and/or contin-
ue to grow over time to help serve as a later down payment for purchase. Renters with an excellent track 
record of saving and caring for properties can be identified and earn the same kind of “advance” for a down 
payment where the Honolulu Down Payment Loan Program is not available.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
This program will help  alleviate housing 
affordability issues, decrease homelessness, 
and improve economic mobility by giving 
residents in need greater flexibility to move 
where the jobs are. This will improve the 
economic and physical security of resi-
dents by decreasing the need to rely on high 
interest loans and predatory payday lenders. 
It will increase disposable income and mit-
igate situations where landlords withhold 
security deposits without cause.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Community Services, 
Hawai‘i Community Foundation

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge    UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

NO POVERTY

Performance Metrics
• Number of security deposit loans administered 
• Delinquency rate on loan payback

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Families move into 
a new housing proj-
ect on Farrington 
Highway in Wai‘anae, 
Kauhale Kamaile

Photo credit: Department 
of Land Management

Honolulu Down Payment Loan Program: The City and County of Honolulu’s Down Payment Loan 
Program is part of the City’s efforts to promote homeownership and create a strong communi-
ty. Utilizing HOME Investment Partnership Act funds from the U.S. Department of Housing and 
Urban Development, this program provides zero interest loan to qualified low- and moderate-in-
come families to meet down payment requirements for home purchase.

3 8

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

3 9

Pillar I.  REM AINI N G  R OOT ED

u

G OAL  2:  Reducing Additional Cost Burdens

Action     6

Expand Housing and Energy Transformation 
by Accelerating the Permitting Process

u In order to meet the challenge  of increasing O‘ahu’s housing stock and meeting renewable energy 
and transportation goals, the City will improve the overall permitting process and expedite critical areas. 
The City will reconvene the Permit Streamlining Task Force to help encourage better coordination and 
training across City departments with input from residents, construction firms, and businesses. The 
City will also work to hire and retain adequate staffing levels to carry out the mission. For many years the 
average staff vacancy in Department of Planning and Permitting (DPP) hovered around 20 percent, cre-
ating significant difficulties in application processes. The reasons for this are multi-faceted, but the City 
recognizes that a long-term solution must be found to have enough staff to both protect public safety and 
efficiently approve permits. 

The City will allow for increased self-service, third-party review, and automated processes and certifi-
cations. We will invest in updates to DPP’s software and will also adopt a stricter approach to accepting 
incomplete applications which has slowed review. 

The City will also maintain a “Mālama Monday” program to allow existing staff to focus on permit pro-
cessing one day a week to clear backlogs, and explore the potential of charging fees for staff to meet with 
applicants for requested meetings.

Energy-related permits are critical to the City’s 100 percent renewable energy goal, and to reducing the 
monthly cost of living for residents seeking to install their own power supply. The City will work to move 
permitting for solar photovoltaic for multi-family and townhomes, energy storage, and electrical vehicle 
charging station permits on-line; allow for email requests for inspections and set a goal of 48 hours from 
initial request to inspection; move to a spot auditing process that utilizes statistical analysis methods; and, 
develop a standardized list of inspection checks and requirements to ensure uniformity and consistency 
from all the inspectors.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
A quicker, more efficient  permitting 
process is not only critical to increase the 
pace of constructing affordable housing 
and save the City, businesses, and residents 
money and time, it will be a major deciding 
factor in the City’s ability to achieve climate 
mitigation and adaptation goals. 

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Planning and Permitting, Resilience 
Office, OED, State Energy Office, Hawai‘i Regional 
Council of Carpenters, Pacific Resource Partner-
ship, Hawai‘i Energy, Hawaiian Electric, Building 
Industry Association of Hawai‘i

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge      UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

INDUSTRY, INNOVATION 
AND ARCHITECTURE

Performance Metrics
• Increase in number of permits issued per 
   staff position 
• Reduction in average duration for permit 
   process from submission to issuance

City ePlans: In July 2012, DPP implemented the Electronic Plan Review 
(ePlans) system on a voluntary basis to provide a more transparent permitting 
process. ePlans eliminates the time-consuming practice of going to the permit 
counter to submit building plans because applicants can file the plans from 
their computer at their convenience. This online system offers financial benefits 
by reducing paper use, printing and storage costs, driving time and gasoline 
consumption. ePlans will be a learning process for both the City and appli-
cants. ePlans is a powerful system to facilitate this action.

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

4 0

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

4 1

Pillar I.  REM AINI N G  R OOT ED

u

G OAL  2:  Reducing Additional Cost Burdens

Action     7

Reduce Utility Costs for Residents through 
Transparency and Disclosure

u Following housing and transportation,  utility bills are the highest expense for an average island 
household, and as of April 2019 O‘ahu has the highest urban residential electricity prices in the nation 
at 28.22 Cents/kWh, compared to a 12.87 cents/kWh national average. The average Hawai‘i households’ 
electricity bill is the highest in the nation at $149.33 a month, which is extraordinary considering that our 
average monthly consumption is the lowest in the nation. While homeowners have a direct incentive to 
lower their monthly consumption and upgrade to energy efficient equipment, this is not always the case 
for owners of rental properties that don’t pay the monthly utility bill. Implementing new policies that 
further incentivize energy efficiency in residential rental and sale properties will lower the long term cost 
of living for O‘ahu households. 

Currently, prior to the sale of residential real property, Hawai‘i property owners are required under state 
law HRS 508D-10.5 to “make a good faith declaration of electricity cost” for the most recent three-month 
period in which the property was occupied. However, no copies of the electricity bills are required, and 
compliance with the law is irregular. 

The City will implement a Residential Energy Conservation Ordinance (RECO) that will allow buyers/
renters to make more informed decisions when deciding to purchase or rent a home. The primary tool to 
promote energy efficiency and increase pricing transparency will be a Standard Energy Disclosure Form 
required from sellers/lessors to buyers/renters of all residences on O‘ahu. This type of transparent dis-
closure requirement will provide buyers and renters with better information about the energy efficiency 
and on-going utility costs of the home or rental unit they are considering, much like appliances require 
disclosure of the average energy use. For the first time, buyers/renters will be able to factor in longer-term 
energy-related operation and maintenance costs into their immediate purchasing decisions. 

A RECO will complement the proposed commercial Energy Benchmarking and Retro-commissioning 
ordinance, and help addresses the “split incentive” problem, as property owners will now have an incen-
tive to increase the energy performance of their units to better attract buyers and renters. This will also 
incentivize efficiency improvements in the existing residential building stock. In addition, since updated 
energy and building code improvements are generally limited to new construction or major improve-
ments, a RECO will help increase efficiency in the more than 80 percent of homes in Hawai‘i that were 
built prior to 1990.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Energy savings will reduce  the long-
term cost of living on O‘ahu. In addi-
tion, this action has several greenhouse 
gas mitigation resilience co-benefits: 
a RECO will promote the reduction of 
greenhouse gas emissions related to 
utilities, reduce electricity usage, and 
improve our move to energy efficiency.

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability, and 
Resiliency, DPP, Hawai‘i Energy, Hawaiian Electric, 
Chamber of Commerce Hawai‘i, Helping Hands 
Hawai‘i

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge     UN SDG
 

 

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

AFFORDABLE AND
CLEAN ENERGY

REDUCED
INEQUALITIES

Performance Metrics
• Percentage of residential properties in 
   compliance with disclosure
• Average energy use per household 

4 2

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

4 3

City of Portland Home Energy Score: Many homes in Portland were built 
in the early 1900s, before building codes set energy efficiency require-
ments. Portland is now one of the first cities in the nation that require 
sellers of single-family homes to obtain and disclose a Home Energy 
Score estimating the energy-related use, associated costs, and cost-ef-
fective solutions to improve the home’s efficiency. In Honolulu, with some 
of the highest home energy costs in the country, potential renters and 
homeowners should know what kind of monthly bill they are likely to 
take on when comparing units.

Graphic credit: 
US DOE

Pillar I.  REM AINI N G  R OOT ED

u

G OAL  2:  Reducing Additional Cost Burdens

Action     8

Increase Housing Affordability by Reducing 
Parking Requirements

u Many U.S. and international cities have updated policies to either greatly reduce the number of parking 
stalls required for development, set a maximum or cap on the number permitted to be provided, or eliminated 
entirely parking requirements from certain types of development. Automobile parking spaces are increas-
ingly becoming a burden instead of a benefit on our cost of living, and with current trends in new mobility, 
they may become a liability in the near future. Parking spaces are expensive to build upfront and maintain 
over the long haul. In Honolulu, each individual parking stall in a parking structure is estimated to cost 
anywhere from $20,000 to $50,000 to build (which is then added to the cost of a housing unit), not in-
cluding the cost of the land itself. These costs are passed on to owners and tenants, thereby driving up the 
cost of housing in urban areas and contributing to affordability issues for O‘ahu’s residents, especially for 
an increasing portion of young residents that elect not to own a car at all. Second, parking spaces take up 
valuable space that could have greater value to serve more pressing social need. Structured parking areas 
takes away space that could otherwise be used to increase our limited housing supply, while the space 
afforded to on-street parking could be better used for other transportation modes like scooters and bicy-
cles, walkways, dedicated public transit lanes, green spaces, and parks. Finally, an over-supply of parking 
spaces encourages more driving, which undermines our ability to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. In 
Mexico City, recent policy changes actually imposed a cap on the number of parking spaces required for 
each housing unit in development.

To decrease the cost burden of parking spaces, the City will update its Land Use Ordinance and consider 
strategies such as having zero parking requirements for new residential properties in Transit-Oriented 
Development zones and implementing parking maximums for specific types of land uses. The City will 
also utilize shared parking strategies (e.g., parking for commuters during the day and residents or retail 
patrons in the evening and weekends) to maximize the use of parking spots. Finally, the City will explore 
passing a Transportation Management Program that would provide incentives for property managers 
to provide new mobility options such as a bikeshare pass or the City’s Holo Card, to tenants instead of 
required parking spots.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
In addition to reducing  the cost of living 
for urban residents, this action will decrease 
greenhouse gas emissions by encouraging 
public transportation and new mobility, 
making space for alternative transportation 
modes and creating room for greenways; 
it will encourage more active lifestyles to 
benefit the health of our communities; and 
improve the walkability of our urban space.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Planning and Permitting, 
HOU, DTS, State DOT

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge     UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

INDUSTRY, INNOVATION 
AND ARCHITECTURE

Performance Metrics
• Decrease in the number of parking stalls 
   per housing unit in new construction
• Number of property managers who provide 
   mobility options to tenants

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Getting Around Town
The City of Seattle, WA, recently adopted a suite of parking reforms that work to 
maximize the use of existing parking, reduce the requirements for the provision of 
off-street car parking and increase the requirements for bicycle parking, and separate 
the costs of parking from rents for those that do not chose to use or do not require 
parking. Seattle also uses both Transportation Demand Management and Commute 
Trip Reduction programs to facilitate the use of a full range of travel options, includ-
ing transit, walking, carpooling, bicycling, and telecommuting. According to Commute 
Seattle, in 2017, just 25 percent of commuters traveling into downtown Seattle are 
driving alone during the peak hours of 6 to 9 am. This number is expected to drop 
even further as City targets gets more aggressive.

4 4

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

4 5

Pillar I.  REM AINI N G  R OOT ED

u

G OAL  3:  Improving Economic Opportunity

Action     9

Foster an Innovation Economy through the 
City’s Office of Economic Development 

u Expanding the diversity of O‘ahu’s economy is a crucial step toward addressing long-term afford-
ability and resiliency for our island community. O‘ahu has a natural advantage in the renewable energy 
market and we should leverage our position for the long-term economic benefit of our workforce. At pres-
ent, 36 percent of Hawai‘i’s economy is largely tied to two sectors: tourism and the military. The tourism 
industry generates 20 percent of Hawai‘i’s total GDP and supports some 204,000 jobs, while military ex-
penditures and contracts constitute another 16 percent. While in recent years Hawai‘i’s tourism industry 
has been steadily growing, it’s clear that the industry is cyclical. In times of global economic downturn, 
economies which are overly dependent on tourism are disproportionately impacted and slow to recover, 
while those with more diversified economies bounce back more quickly. Meanwhile, the recent political 
turmoil surrounding the U.S. federal budget has cast doubt upon the reliability of federal spending and 
support. 

The State and City have strong alignment in their energy and sustainability goals, but the business and 
entrepreneurial sector is critical to ensuring progress on the energy front and developing innovation as a 
“third” pillar of our economy. 

The City can strengthen nascent partnerships and develop additional capacity at the City’s Office of 
Economic Development (OED). OED could benefit from a clearer mission and establishing it in the City 
Charter, while supporting the creation of an “innovation economy” with additional key personnel. A 
next-generation OED could establish a “one-stop” shop for investor and entrepreneurs, especially those 
bringing foreign direct investment. OED can also work across City departments to reduce barriers for new 
businesses, start-ups, and nonprofits who could pilot new innovations at City facilities and update web 
resources to include an inventory of resources and tips for doing business on O‘ahu. OED will also include 
appropriately trained economic personnel with requisite language skills to provide service and assistance 
to international markets. This is especially important due to the growing recognition of Hawai‘i as an 
energy hub for the Asia-Pacific region. OED will closely partner with the multiple local incubators that are 
supporting start-up enterprises that can build inroads to sister cities through OED’s networks; commit to 
the creation of an O’ahu Economic Development Strategy every five years developed in close partnership 
with key stakeholders; and, introduce a Business Incentive Program for Honolulu, with the desired out-
come to create and retain quality jobs and capital investments across O‘ahu, with a particular emphasis in 
low- and moderate-income communities.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Besides reducing economic vulnerability   
for our island, diversification can also create 
economic opportunities for a wider swath 
of O‘ahu’s residents, building new pathways 
for underemployed and vulnerable popula-
tions. Encouraging the development of the 
renewable energy sector and the broader 
green and blue economies can also create 
a workforce with the skills and know-how 
to hasten Hawa‘i’s transition away from oil 
dependence and adapt our communities in 
the face of climate change.  

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

San Diego’s Economic Develop-
ment Strategy 2017-2019:
San Diego, CA, like Honolulu, 
was dependent on tourism and 
the military, but made a concert-
ed effort over a decade ago to 
partner with the academic and 
non-profit sectors to build an 
ecosystem that helped energy 
innovation thrive. Today, San 
Diego stands out as a strong 
example of where smart city 
technology, innovation, and 
renewable energy have helped 
them decouple their economic 
performance from their carbon 
emissions.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Office of Economic Development, State DBEDT, 
State DOA, Chamber of Commerce of Hawai‘i, Uni-
versity of Hawai‘i, Oceanit, Hawaiian Electric, O‘ahu 
Economic Development Board, Elemental Excel-
erator, East-West Center, Hawai‘i Business Council, 
Hawai‘i Community Foundation

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge    UN SDG
 

GREEN WORK FORCE
& EDUCATION

DECENT WORK AND
ECONOMIC GROWTH

INDUSTRY, INNOVATION 
AND ARCHITECTURE

Performance Metrics
• Percent GDP attributed to non-tourism/non-military
• Amount of foreign direct investment in the 
   innovation economy arena

E C O N O M I C   D E V E L O P M E N T   S T R A T E G Y

  2 0 1 7 - 2 0 1 9

4 6

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

4 7

Pillar I.  REM AINI N G  R OOT ED

u

G OAL  3:  Improving Economic Opportunity

Action     10

Promote New Agricultural Models for 
Economic and Food Security

u Currently, 85-90 percent of Hawai‘i’s food is imported. This not only presents a significant security issue 
should a shock or stress interrupt the supply of food to our island community, but long distance shipping also 
drives up the cost of living for residents, contributes to our state’s high greenhouse gas emissions, and saps the 
nutrients and shelf life from the food we eat. Furthermore, dependence on imported food makes our island 
particularly vulnerable to global energy and high food prices.    

According to the State Department of Business, Economic Development & Tourism (DBEDT), replacing just 
10 percent of the food Hawai‘i currently imports would shift some $313 million dollars per year back to local 
businesses in the State of Hawai‘i.  

Specific recommended actions include the following:

• Engage an “O‘ahu Food Policy Council”, made up of local food policy and farming leaders, to guide 
and advise the City on best practices to ignite a more robust local food and urban farming industry in 
Honolulu.
• Implement City-related elements of the State Office of Planning Department of Business, Economic 
Development & Tourism’s Increased Food Security and Food Self-Sufficiency Strategy.
• Create an “Urban Farming Roadmap” and partner with nonprofits to pilot projects to support 
struggling farmers and showcase container farming in the urban-core to test potential to scale more 
broadly on island.
• Create clear, strategic collaboration between the City and accelerator/incubator groups working 
in the local food space to encourage mentorship, adoption of technology, and find new pathways to 
investment for local food entrepreneurs. 

In addition, an important agricultural lands designation ordinance should be implemented and the Agricultural 
Liaison position will work closely with State Department of Agriculture and the Agribusiness Development 
Corporation to promote local food production and self-sufficiency in more traditional non-urban farm opera-
tions on island. Finally, agricultural sustainability should be encouraged by producing more agricultural inputs 
on-island and encouraging small-scale backyard farming through programs and policy.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Developing urban farming  will decrease 
O‘ahu’’s food insecurity and reliance on 
imports in the face of natural disasters and 
global energy/commodity price fluctuations. 
Furthermore, it will create jobs and diver-
sify O‘ahu’s economy; reduce pressure for 
land cultivation on our land-limited island; 
minimize agricultural water consumption; 
provide a system for recycling urban waste; 
increase urban green space; and provide 
O‘ahu’s residents with fresher, more nutri-
ent-rich products.   

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Office of Economic Development, DPP, DPR, State 
DBEDT, State DOA, Hawai‘i Green Growth Lo-
cal2030 Hub, Kupu 

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge      UN SDG
 

 

LOCAL FOOD

ZERO HUNGER

DECENT WORK AND
ECONOMIC GROWTH

Performance Metrics
• Percentage of local food produced and 
   consumed on O‘ahu
• Reduce average age of farmers on O‘ahu by 
   engaging youth over time

4 8

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

4 9

Freight Farms is a Boston-based company that modifies shipping containers to grow 
hydroponic plants and vegetables. A couple of the benefits touted are the ability to 
grow food anywhere—even in an unused shopping center parking lot—and year-round, 
since water, light, and nutrient input are automatically controlled.

Pillar II.

Bouncing
Forward

Fostering Resilience in the Face 
of Natural Disasters
 O‘ahu faces incredibly unique challenges when it comes to 
natural disasters. Take into consideration that we are one of the most 
isolated places on Earth. In the event of a natural disaster, disruptions 
to air or shipping lines could lead to significant delays in emergency 
response and the delivery of food (up to 90 percent of which is imported), 
medicine, and other critical supplies. Honolulu’s island infrastructure 
is also extremely vulnerable, with many roadways, bridges and facilities 
located in coastal and flood-prone areas. What’s more, many of O‘ahu’s 
communities are linked by a single roadway—and a flood or storm could 
sever roadways and completely cut off communities.

On top of these geographic and 
physical vulnerabilities, climate 
change is a threat multiplier. 
In recent decades, coastal 
communities like O‘ahu have 
accounted for the majority of U.S. 
annual disaster losses. 
Sixty percent of O‘ahu’s critical infrastruc-
ture and two-thirds of our population are 
located within a mile of the coast. In Hawai‘i, 
climate change has already caused more fre-
quent and powerful hurricanes and tropical 
storms, intense rainfall, and flood events, a 
trend which will continue and worsen in the 
future. 
 
O‘ahu has not been truly tested by a 
hurricane in modern history, but one is 
certain to come. The 2015 and 2018 storm 
seasons brought multiple massive storms 
dangerously close to our island home. The 
reality is that when we are hit by even a 
Category 1 hurricane, up to 65 percent of our 
current residential housing stock is project-
ed to be destroyed or severely damaged. The 
example of devastation wrecked by Hurri-
cane Marìa on our sister island of Puerto 
Rico—which lost 6 percent of its population 
to migration after the storm—served as a 
massive wake-up call for Hawai‘i residents. 
A report following Marìa underscored how 
ill-prepared FEMA was to manage a crisis 
outside the continental U.S., and urged com-
munities to be better prepared with their 
own supplies especially in remote or insular 
areas like O‘ahu. Our policies and programs 
to safeguard life and property have not kept 
up with the escalating risk, and a resilient 
path forward for our island requires new 
investments and approaches.  
 
communities prepare and become more resil-
ient to natural disasters and external shocks 
by learning from past disasters, improving 
local infrastructure, and planning for recov-
ery. We want to bounce back quickly, but we 
can also “bounce forward” in the wake of a 
disaster by building back smarter, stronger, 
and in more resilient locations so that we are 
better prepared for the next event. 

The actions in this pillar help O‘ahu 

As such, the following actions present measures to take 
before an event to reduce its impacts and consequences; 
establishing systems to be able to respond and support 
each other during and immediately following an event; 
as well as, having the long-view to ensure our recovery 
efforts following a significant event does not place us back 
into a vulnerable condition.

GOAL 1
Pre-Disaster Preparation
Action 11   Protect Lives and Property 
 
by Updating Building Codes

Action 12  Launch Residential Hurricane Retrofit 
 
 

Program to Strengthen Properties 
Vulnerable to Hurricanes

Action 13 
 

Increase Flood Insurance Affordability
for O‘ahu Residents

Action 14  Establish Future Conditions Climate 
 

Resilience Design Guidelines

GOAL 2
Effective Disaster Response
Action 15  Develop a Network of Community 
 

Resilience Hubs

Action 16  Establish an O‘ahu Emergency Food 
 

Supply and Storage Strategy

Action 17  Ensure Access to Fuel Supplies to Aid 
 

Disaster Response and Recovery

Action 18 
 
 

Increase O‘ahu’s Preparedness Utilizing 
Scenario Modeling and Artificial 
Intelligence

GOAL 3
Successful Disaster Recovery
Action 19  Develop and Implement a Long-Term 
 

Disaster Recovery Plan for O‘ahu

5 0

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y     «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

5 1

Pillar II.  B OU N C I N G   FORWA R D

u

G OAL  1 :  Pre-Disaster Preparation 

Action    11

Protect Lives and Property by Updating 
Building Codes 

u Adopting up-to-date building codes is one of the most important steps the City can take to protect 
public safety and infrastructure. Given the acceleration of extreme weather and the growing likelihood of a 
hurricane strike, our buildings have to be built stronger, especially in coastal areas. Sixty percent of O‘ahu’s 
critical infrastructure and two-thirds of our population are located within a mile of the coast. The City’s 
ability to provide critical services in the wake of a disaster is therefore particulary vulnerable when coastal 
hazards occur, such as storm surge, flooding, tsunamis, and sea level rise. 

As the City prepares for these increasing hazards, codifying resilience in the building industry reduces our 
risk of infrastructure loss. Our current out-of-date building, electrical, energy, and plumbing codes not only 
increase risk, they also have energy efficiency, water use, and cost of living impacts. FEMA has indicated 
that O‘ahu will have difficulty qualifying for federal hazard mitigation and other disaster funds if codes are 
not upgraded immediately. Updating building codes result in a significant return on investment: a recent 
study from the National Institute of Building Sciences (see call out) reported that $1 spent on new code 
requirements results in $11 of avoided property damage and homeowner savings in the event of disaster. 

Nearly 65 percent of all single-family homes on O‘ahu lack sufficient hurricane wind resistance, and a 
Category 1 hurricane could result in more than 20,000 people needing short- to long-term shelter. The esti-
mated losses from a Category 3 hurricane could exceed $26 billion for O‘ahu, which is directly related to our 
older building stock and our lack of regular updates to our building codes. The City must move quickly to 
bring all building codes up to date, and put in place a system that regularly adopts updated codes approved 
by the State Building Code Council within two years of issuance. Currently, the City is operating on 2006 
building codes—over a decade out of date. In the short term, the Department of Planning and Permitting 
(DPP) will provide the following updated code ordinances to the City Council for adoption by the end of 
2019: 2015 Energy Code; 2017 Electrical Code; 2012 Building Code; 2012 Plumbing Code; and, 2012 Fire 
Code. Following these short-term updates, DPP will provide the following in 2020 to bring O‘ahu fully up 
to date: 2018 Energy Code; 2020 Electrical Code; 2018 Building Code; 2018 Plumbing Code; and, 2018 Fire 
Code. A dedicated position is required within DPP to represent the City at the State Building Code Coun-
cil to tailor national codes for Hawai‘i application. The position would also regularly prepare and submit 
to Council updates of each successive code for local adoption. In the immediate term, a contract position 
should continue to assist the DPP to produce updated code ordinances.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Standard code updates help  improve 
resiliency, but adopting tandem “green 
building codes” alongside standard codes can 
provide additional efficiency and long-term 
cost savings benefits for building owners and 
renters. One example is the International Code 
Council’s (ICC’s) Green Construction Code 
(IgCC)—an overlay code written in a manner 
that enables it to be joined with all other ICC 
codes. The IgCC includes specifications for 
carbon footprint reduction, site development, 
land use, energy efficiency, water conservation, 
material resource conservation and efficiency, 
indoor environmental quality and comfort, 
commissioning and operations and main-
tenance, and existing buildings-- generally 
increasing the efficiency of the baseline IECC 
provisions by 10 percent. 

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and Resiliency, 
DCS, DEM, DPP, UH, NDPTC, State DCCA, Kupu, Amer-
ican Red Cross Hawai‘i, Hawai‘i Insurers Council, Island 
Insurance, Zephyr Insurance, Pacific Resource Partner-
ship, Helping Hands Hawai‘i 

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge    UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

INDUSTRY, INNOVATION 
AND ARCHITECTURE

Performance Metrics
• Reductions in insurance premiums for 
   improved homes
• Percentage of identified homes on island 
   utilizing the retrofit program

S P O T L I G H T

National Benefit-Cost Ratio Per Peril
*BCR numbers in this study have been rounded 

Exceed common
code requirements

Meet common

code requirements

Utilities and
transportation

Federally
funded

Overall Hazard Benefit-Cost Ratio

Riverine Flood

Hurricane Surge

Wind

4:1

5:1

7:1

5:1

11:1

6:1

Not

applicable

10:1

4:1

8:1

6:1

7:1

Not

applicable

Not

applicable

7:1

5:1

National Benefit-Cost Ratio by Hazard Mitigation Measure 
If the City invests now in mitigation, rather than clean-up after a natural hazard, the return 
on investments are considerable: 
Exceeding common code requirements saves $4 per $1 spent; Adopting model codes saves 
$11 per $1; mitigating infrastructure saves $4 per $1 spent; Federal mitigation grants save $6 
per $1 spent. 

Graphic adopted from National Institute of Building Sciences

5 2

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

5 3

Pillar II.  B OU N C I N G   FORWA R D

u

G OAL  1 :  Pre-Disaster Preparation 

Action    12

Launch Hurricane Retrofit Program 
for Vulnerable Homes

u Two out of every three O‘ahu single-family homes will not provide sufficient shelter during a Catego-
ry 1 hurricane or even a strong tropical storm and are in need of strengthening. Homes built before 1995 did 
not require a continuous load path down to the foundation; homes built before 1988 did not require wind 
uplift ties of the roof to the wall. When Hurricane Iniki struck Kaua‘i in 1992, 41 percent of the island’s 
15,200 homes were damaged or destroyed. However, older homes can be retrofitted to significantly reduce 
the risk of structural failure in a storm. A home retrofit can provide many benefits including: allowing 
residents to shelter in place; reducing demand for emergency shelter capacity; decreasing damage and 
economic impact in the wake of a disaster; and, increasing the chances that residents can remain in their 
homes post-disaster. This is especially important for economically strained households, who typically have 
fewer resources to buffer risks and recovery after a shock. Incentivizing hurricane retrofits for vulnerable 
households will save lives, protect property and reduce the fiscal impact to the City following a disaster by 
preserving its tax base. 

The City will work with the non-profit and private sector to provide incentives to retrofit pre-1995 homes 
for our most vulnerable residents. The City should first create an inventory of homes built before 1995, and 
then overlay that with a map of the neighborhoods and areas that are both most prone to hurricane damage 
and likely to house vulnerable populations. With this data in hand by the end of 2019, the City should create 
a retrofit program based on the successful earthquake retrofit models in San Francisco and California that 
have assisted property owners to retrofit their homes and rental properties. Property owners that success-
fully retrofit and certify completion of their pre-1995 structure can qualify for a property tax credit that ex-
tends for several years. Certified retrofitted homes should also qualify for a discount in hurricane insurance 
premiums from providers, increasing the likelihood that hurricane policies will be purchased and available 
to reduce out of pocket losses following a disaster. Finally, the retrofit program itself can be implemented as 
an economic development and job training program for youth to develop construction skills while protect-
ing the homes of our most vulnerable residents.

Additionally, the City will explore the establishment of a PACE-type (Property Assessed Clean Energy) 
financing tool that enables all homeowners regardless of income or location to access reasonably priced 
financing to retrofit structures built before 1995.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Increased awareness by resi-
dents  of the dangers presented 
by hurricanes, and education on 
proper disaster mitigation based on 
their structure, and the category of 
hurricane. For low-grade hurri-
canes, increased ability to shelter 
in place (by homeowners who were 
recipients of hurricane retrofits) 
will decrease shelter overcrowding 
and mobilize resources for City 
residents who are in most need. 

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and Resiliency, 
DCS, DEM, DPP, University of Hawai‘i Sea Grant College 
Program, State DCCA, Kupu, American Red Cross Ha-
wai‘i, Hawai‘i Insurers Council, Island Insurance, Zephyr 
Insurance, Pacific Resource Partnership, Helping Hands 
Hawai‘i, NDTPC

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge   
 

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

UN SDG

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

PARTNERSHIPS FOR THE GOALS

Performance Metrics
• Successful partnership established 
• Percentage of identified homes on island 
   utilizing the retrofit program
• Map of homes built pre-1995, with areas most 
   prone to hurricane damage and vulnerable 
   populations

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

 

Receive Up to $3,000 Toward 
an Earthquake Retrofit
Earthquake Brace + Bolt (EBB) helps homeowners 
lessen the potential for damage during an earthquake. 
EBB offers up to $3,000 toward a code-compliant seismic 
retrofit for houses that qualify. 
                      A Brace and Bolt Retrofit
In an EBB retrofit, the foundation is  
bolted, and if there is a cripple wall, 
it is braced.
• Bolting: adding anchor bolts in the 
  crawl space to help prevent the   
  home from sliding.
• Bracing: adding plywood to the  
  cripple walls to stiffen them and help  
  prevent the home from collapsing.
CRAWL SPACE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

FLOOR JOISTS

 CRIPPLE
WALL
STUDS 

FOUNDATION

GROUND

VENT HOLES

NEW 
FRAMING 
CLIPS

NEW 
PLYWOOD 

NEW WOOD 
BLOCKING 

NEW ANCHOR BOLTS

EBB Participating Homeowners
Qualifying homeowners will be selected through a random 
drawing and will be notified if they are selected to participate 
or are placed on the wait list. For a retrofit to qualify for 
an incentive, a permit must not be issued or retrofit work 
started before being selected to participate.

“EBB is an excellent program! Super easy 
for homeowners, thanks EBB. My home is 
much safer now.” —David, Pasadena
Eligible Applicants
YOU may be eligible to receive up to $3,000 
if you own a qualifying house in an EBB ZIP 
Code and you:
• Use the house as your primary residence;
• Are an owner of record; and
• Reside in the house when registering and  
  when the retrofit is complete.
A list of EBB cities is on the back. For a complete 
list of EBB ZIP Codes (eligibility is based on 
ZIP Codes) visit EarthquakeBraceBolt.com.
Houses That Qualify, Typically:
• Are built before 1980 (but are more 
  prevalent before 1940);
• Have a raised continuous perimeter 
  concrete foundation;
• Sit on level ground or a low-slope; and
• May have wood-framed walls (called cripple  
  walls) in the crawl space under the first floor.
Registration
To learn when EBB registration opens, sign up 
for updates at EarthquakeBraceBolt.com. 
To participate, homeowners must:
• Own a home in a designated ZIP Code;
• Create an online account and register; 
• Confirm eligibility by answering questions; and
• Be selected after registration through a  
  random drawing.
Visit EarthquakeBraceBolt.com to:
• Review video and pictures of EBB retrofits;
• See answers to frequently asked questions; 
• Learn about EBB program details;
• Get a complete list of current EBB ZIP Codes;
• Find a FEMA-trained contractor; and
• Read what EBB customers are saying    
  about the program. 

 

 

Earthquake 
Brace + Bolt 
(EBB) 

Older homes can be made 
safer through a municipal 
retrofit program. In California, 
homes are made stronger to 
protect against earthquakes. 
On O‘ahu, we need to make 
our older homes more resilient 
to tropical storms and hurri-
canes.

5 4

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

5 5

Pillar II.  B OU N C I N G   FORWA R D

u

G OAL  1 :  Pre-Disaster Preparation 

Action    13

Increase Flood Insurance Affordability 
for O‘ahu Residents

u Climate change is increasing both the intensity and frequency of flood events on O‘ahu, and flood 
insurance is more important than ever to reduce financial risk. Reducing flood vulnerability helps protect 
lives and property, bounce back faster after a disaster, and safeguard our economy and neighborhoods. 
Historic flood events such as the New Year’s Eve Flood of 1987 and the Mānoa flood of 2004, and the recent 
April 2018 “rain bomb” which flooded East Honolulu and Windward O‘ahu are potent reminders of the eco-
nomic risks we face. The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) helps protect property and structures 
with federally-subsidized insurance rates for property owners, tenants and companies.

The Community Rating System (CRS) is a voluntary program of the NFIP that rewards cities and counties 
who proactively implement community-wide floodplain resilience activities. Jurisdictions that exceed the 
minimum floodplain management requirements earn reductions in flood insurance premiums for their 
residents. With NFIP rates likely to rise in the future due to increased flood damage around the nation, 
buffering increases with premium reduction is more important than ever. The risk is real for homeowners. 
A “100 year” flood has a 26 percent—a 1 in 4—chance of happening over a typical 30-year mortgage.

The City can reduce NFIP flood insurance premiums for O‘ahu residents by a minimum of 5 percent in the 
next two years by applying to and maintaining standing in the CRS. Additional savings and flood resilience 
can also be achieved. Currently, flood insurance policy holders in the County of Maui benefit from 
a 15 percent reduction in their NFIP premiums due to Maui’s proactive flood risk reduction mea-
sures. Residents of the County of Hawai‘i already receive 10 percent reductions. If O‘ahu follows 
suit, residents will save from $1.2 to $3.2 million annually as the result of reduced premiums depending on 
the types of proactive actions. 

The City should: 1) Develop a Cooperative Technical Partnership with FEMA that can help provide resourc-
es to the City to develop a CRS program and enhance flood resources; 2) Engage a consultant to prepare and 
submit a CRS application in the next application round; 3) Earn certification that the City has exceeded the 
minimum NFIP requirements and qualifies for the CRS; 4) Designate or hire a dedicated CRS Coordinator 
position in the Department of Planning and Permitting in the FY21 Budget; 5) Annually certify the City’s 
compliance with CRS standards via the Coordinator; and, 6) Look for opportunities to expand programs that 
improve the City’s CRS rank which in turn gains greater flood insurance discounts and flood risk resilience for 
O‘ahu residents.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Discounted insurance premiums 
provide savings to local residents 
and keep those funds circulating in 
the local economy. Reduced flood ex-
posure allows the economy and com-
munities to rebound more quickly 
after flood events, and participating 
in the CRS allows O‘ahu to have a 
nationally recognized benchmark to 
adopt best practices from other com-
munities and compare our progress 
and preparedness. Many of the new 
policies and regulations incentivized 
by the CRS also increase the City’s 
ability to qualify for and secure 
other federal aid and assistance 
programs—ensuring we don’t leave 
federal resources on the table.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and Resiliency, 
DPP, State DLNR, FEMA

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge     UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

LIFE ON LAND

Performance Metrics
• Achieve CRS recognition for the city by 2021
• Percentage reduction in flood insurance premiums 
  for local residents over five years

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

$703Saved

The average amount of dollars each household in Fort Collins, Colorado saves every year on 
their federal flood insurance premium payment. Fort Collins holds one of the highest ratings na-
tionally—which saves them money and attributes their lack of structural damage suffered during 
the devastating 2013 Poudre River Flood to their proactive CRS flood resilience efforts.

5 6

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

5 7

Pillar II.  B OU N C I N G   FORWA R D

u

G OAL  1 :  Pre-Disaster Preparation 

Action    14

Establish Future Conditions Climate 
Resilience Design Guidelines

u Climate change is moving fast—our infrastructure and building design standards need to evolve quickly 
as well. While the science and data regarding climate change impacts are continuously improved and updated, 
new knowledge often takes time to integrate into formal land use and building code rules. Newly observed trends 
around increasing heat, decreasing trade winds, increasing flooding, and sea level rise can be incorporated more 
quickly into optional guidelines rather than mandatory rules, filling the void between when new information is 
available and when cyclical updates of broader community plans and building standards are revisited. 

Forward-looking advisory guidelines can serve as an important interim step to help the City incorporate volun-
tary design changes on its own projects before the broader industry evolves standards and codes for tomorrow’s 
environment. The Honolulu Climate Change Commission has already produced two white papers that can 
support new practices: Climate Change Brief and Sea Level Rise Guidance. These documents provide localized 
information on trends and potential impacts and can be used to draft forward-looking “optional” guidelines for 
both public and private projects. Adaptive design that factors in these local projections can help protect buildings 
and get development underway now to protect against predicted future hazards.
 
Mayor’s Directive 18-2 issued in July 2018 instructed departments to incorporate the Climate Change Brief and 
Sea Level Rise Guidance in the design of City projects and the review of private projects. Issuing design guide-
lines to help assist this process with recommended specifications will be helpful for all parties involved, from 
public agencies and regulators, to design consultants and their clients. Additional material considerations will be 
given with respect to new and improved technologies such as carbon-sequestering concrete and glue-laminated 
timber.

The City will form an interdepartmental working group with outside participation of design and built envi-
ronment professional organizations to develop future conditions Climate Resilience Design Guidelines. The 
purpose of the guidelines will be to provide step-by-step instructions on how to supplement historic climate 
data with specific, regional, forward-looking climate change data in the design of City and private facilities and 
infrastructure.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
In conjunction with design-
ing buildings for withstanding 
shocks and stressors, additional 
design considerations may be made 
to enhance the quality of life of 
O‘ahu’s residents. Such opportuni-
ties include, but are not limited to, 
community-driven research and 
design approaches (such as design 
challenges), reinvigorated neighbor-
hoods, diversified transportation op-
tions/increased mobility, bolstered 
fire safety, increased access to social 
services, open space/biodiversity 
preservation, and carbon-neutral 
buildings.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Design and Construction, Resilience 
Office, ENV, DFM, DPP, BWS, NDPTC, Oceanit 

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge     UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

INDUSTRY, INNOVATION 
AND ARCHITECTURE

Performance Metrics
• Resilience Design Guidelines produced
• Number of City projects utilizing the guidelines

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

In March 2019, New York City re-
leased Version 3.0 of its Climate 
Resiliency Design Guidelines 
to provide architects, engineers, 
planners, and other professionals 
with step-by-step instructions 
on how to incorporate sci-
ence-based anticipated changes 
in temperature, precipitation, and 
sea levels into the design of City 
facilities. The Guidelines are used 
throughout the design process—
during capital planning initiation, 
as a references in requests for 
proposals during a conceptual or 
study phase, through final design. 
The Guidelines have also gone 
through revisions and updates as 
they are used more and as new 
information becomes available.

i e n c y   D e s i g n   G u i d e l

  V e r s i o n   3 . 0

i n e s  

-

i m a t e   R e s i

l

  C l

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

N Y C   M a y o r

 
i e n c y

l

’ s   O f fi c e   o f

l

  R e c o v e r y   a n d   R e s i
R e c o v e r 

i e n c y  
  y   a n d   R e s i

l
i m a t e   R e s i
C l
D e s i g n   G u i d e l

i e n c y  
i n e s

M a r c h   2 0 1 9
V e r s i o n   3 . 0

1

5 8

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

5 9

Pillar II.  B OU N C I N G   FORWA R D

u

G OAL  2:  Effective Disaster Response

Action    15

Develop a Network of Community 
Resilience Hubs

u As natural disasters become more frequent and powerful with climate change, local communities 
must become more prepared. Puerto Rico’s island population demonstrated the dire need for impromp-
tu ‘Resilience Hubs’ in the wake of Hurricane Marìa in 2017. Where cell towers survived, or emergency 
generators were able to function, neighborhoods came together to get trusted news, charge phones, and 
communicate with loved ones that they were safe. These “impromptu” hubs showed that stronger, planned 
Resilience Hubs should be designed by communities ahead of time and serve as known gathering spots for 
local residents.

The concept of Resilience Hubs has gained momentum across the nation in the wake of recent disasters, 
and have the potential to serve as a bridges between multiple layers of community, local, state, and federal 
agencies during disaster response. State and Federal disaster responses are more efficient and effective 
when they can be assisted and guided by a well-organized local government and empowered local commu-
nities. Hubs support local resident needs and coordinate resource distribution and services during disaster 
response and recovery, but they can also provide other community benefits and services year-round.

Resilience Hubs should be defined by each neighborhood or local community for their own needs and 
goals, however many are focused on providing the following during a disaster: 1) Emergency shelter during 
a disaster; 2) A central community gathering/information site and distribution center post-disaster; 3) 
Renewable energy and energy storage/supply even if the grid is down; 4) Water and food stores; and, 5) 
Medical supplies.  

The City will create a Resilience Hub Action Plan for O‘ahu by the end of 2020 to determine which commu-
nities are open to developing Resilience Hubs, assess the best potential locations and what infrastructure is 
available in each area, and make early determination about what elements would be prioritized in consul-
tation with local neighborhood boards and others. Simultaneously, the City will work with local commu-
nities that have already voiced a desire to establish a Resilience Hub to seek funding and establish pilot 
hubs in the communities currently most vulnerable to hazards. The City will also determine the viability of 
ensuring off-grid performance for fire stations around the island as part of the same analysis (fire stations 
will not serve as designated Resilience Hubs themselves, however, but this could enable them to best serve 
their vital community emergency response operations). Finally, the City will perform an inventory of City 
properties and assets to ensure that potential strategic sites for future Resilience Hub facilities are includ-
ed in a comprehensive Energy Performance Plus contract as priorities to host renewable energy and energy 
storage upgrades.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Though Resilience Hubs will 
serve critical roles during and im-
mediately following an emergency, 
these community assets also have 
clear benefits and enhance social 
resilience ahead of a disaster. Resil-
ience Hubs can provide year-round 
community services (such as a 
gym), focal points for neighborhood 
revitalization (housing tools and 
job training), education centers for 
the public (computer labs that can 
provide a coordination center in an 
emergency), and training areas to 
coordinate community level efforts 
to increase resilience.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Emergency Management, Resilience 
Office, DLM, DPP, DPR, HESD, HFP, HPD, LHA Ventures, 
Hau‘ula Emergency Leadership Preparedness (HELP), 
American Red Cross Hawai‘i, State DOH, State DOE, Ha-
waiian Electric, Hawai‘i Community Foundation, Neigh-
borhood Boards, Cross-Island Community Resilience 
Network, NDTPC, East-West Center

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge   

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

UN SDG
SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

INDUSTRY, INNOVATION 
AND ARCHITECTURE

Performance Metrics
• Completed Resilience Hub Assessment
• Number of Local Communities Working Toward 
   Establishing a Hub

S P O T L I G H T

Hau‘ula Emergency 
Leadership 
Preparedness 
(HELP)

The HELP Committee has drafted a plan for the future 
Hau‘ula Resilience Hub for Hau‘ula and Ko‘olauloa com-
munities at the Halau o Ko‘olauloa Community Center. The 
center will incorporate seven key strategies for resilience in 
small rural coastal communities (SRRCCs): 1) Water Securi-
ty: Availability of drinking water and potable water 2) Food 
Security: Availability of traditional healthy foods grown 
locally 3) Energy/Electricity: Availability of electricity (mini-
grid/ TCOM) for most critical services 4) Health Security: 
Emergency Medical Services/ Critical Care Services 5) 
Emergency Shelter from Hurricanes, Tsunami, Flooding: 
Plan & Build Shelter/Community Center 6) Security/Safety: 
Develop a plan with to keep community residents safe/se-
cure 7) Connector Roads: Safe roads that connect commu-
nity members to shelter and evacuation sites. Once imple-
mented, the Hau‘ula Resilience Hub is intended to serve as 
a model for other to be completed hubs in SRRCCs. 

6 0

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

6 1

Pillar II.  B OU N C I N G   FORWA R D

u

G OAL  2:  Effective Disaster Response

Action    16

Establish an O‘ahu Emergency Food Supply 
and Storage Strategy

u Blessed with large fresh water aquifers  and increasing amounts of renewable energy, food is O‘ahu’s 
Achilles heel in a disaster. Due to O‘ahu’s extreme geographic isolation, vulnerable critical infrastructure 
in coastal areas (Honolulu Harbor and Daniel K. Inouye International Airport), reliance on imports for 
upwards of 90 percent of our food, and limited transportation systems, our island’s food supply chain will 
face serious challenges following a disaster. Disaster feeding is comprised of the preparation and delivery 
of cooked meals, perishable foods, snacks, and water from mobile and fixed sites in the wake of a disaster. 
These operations require mass feeding infrastructure and the cooperative efforts of City, State, Federal, 
and international governmental and non-governmental organizations to provide food and hydration to 
disaster survivors in need. City level disaster feeding operations are the first line of support to assist local 
community operations. 

The City must be proactive and work with other stakeholders to help ensure adequately stocked food stores 
to feed our population in an emergency via a coordinated distribution system, with special priority placed 
on reaching our most vulnerable populations. Residents are currently advised to store at least two weeks of 
food for emergencies in their homes. This can be difficult for O‘ahu’s population due to small living spac-
es, high percentages of vulnerable populations such as homeless, asset limited, income constrained, and 
employed (ALICE) families and individuals, kūpuna, and persons with disabilities. The ability to identify 
and reach these communities calls for the establishment of an emergency food supply and storage plan to 
adequately respond during an emergency.

To advance food security in the aftermath of a disaster, the City will: (1) Convene experts, community 
members, and relevant agencies to sit on a permanent Emergency Feeding Task Force—a planning and 
coordinating body to create an island-wide emergency food supply and storage plan and execute feeding 
support operations during a disaster; (2) Dedicate or establish a position in the City to coordinate the O‘ahu 
Emergency Food Supply and Storage Strategy; (3) Identify and map food banks, while integrating findings 
from the O‘ahu SoVI study to identify the location of food system resources/assets in relation to vulnerable 
populations; (4) Educate stakeholders about the need for an emergency food supply and reach out to private 
companies and businesses across O‘ahu who have storage space for additional storage/relocation of facil-
ities; and, (5) Support the development of continuity plans/strategies for those organizations leading and 
participating in this action.

6 2

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
One in eight residents on 
O‘ahu participate in the Sup-
plemental Nutrition Assis-
tance Program (SNAP), and 
the Hawai‘i Foodbank assists 
one in five people City-wide, 
including low-income families, 
seniors, disabled, homeless 
individuals and the working 
poor. If designed well, when not 
needed for disaster, the rotating 
food stocks may supplement 
important community organi-
zations’ efforts to feed those in 
need. This will create a happier, 
healthier, and more cohesive 
community, while increasing 
food security.

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Social Vulnerability Index
Resilience in the face of 
disaster is not only defined 
by physical assets: each 
family and neighborhood 
varies in terms of vulnera-
bility and resources. As part 
of the Resilience Strategy 
development process, and 
at the recommendation of 
this Pillar’s Working Group, 
a customized index of social 
vulnerability (SoVI, So-
cioeconomic Vulnerability 
Index) was developed for 
O‘ahu. This SoVI assessed 
community’s susceptibil-
ity to certain disasters in 
relation to the capacity to 
mitigate or adapt to envi-
ronmental shocks based 
on certain socioeconomic 
variables. The resulting 
maps and information are 
helpful first screening tools 
to further communicate 

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Emergency Management, DFM, DLM, DPP, OED, 
Aloha United Way, American Red Cross Hawai‘i, Hawai‘i Food 
Bank, Kanu Hawai‘i, NDTPC, Hawai‘i Community Foundation

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge      UN SDG
 

 

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

ZERO HUNGER

Performance Metrics
• Convene permanent Emergency Feeding Task Force
• Mapping tool indicating food system resources/
   assets overlaid with vulnerable/at-risk population 
   to assess needs
• O‘ahu Emergency Food & Storage Plan developed 
   and in place

with target communities and geographies, and are an import-
ant tool to help guide prioritization of projects and policies to 
best serve those in most need of support. Given O‘ahu’s unique 
hazards, the SoVI helps to: 1) locate the most vulnerable pop-
ulations, 2) understand the primary drivers of vulnerability and 
3) recognize the differential effects on vulnerability posed by 
different hazards.

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

6 3

Pillar II.  B OU N C I N G   FORWA R D

u

G OAL  2:  Effective Disaster Response

Action    17

Ensure Access to Fuel Supplies to Aid 
Disaster Response and Recovery

u In the long-term,  the City has strong goals to increase resilience through a 100 percent renewable elec-
trical grid and ground transportation system that can be powered from micro-grids in the wake of a disaster. 
However, in the near-term, much of the City’s emergency response vehicles and equipment—as well as a ma-
jority of residents’ modes of transportation—depend on petroleum-based fuels. In the event of an island-wide 
power outage, residents and responders may face widespread loss of access to fuel stored in underground tanks 
at fuel depots and gas stations due to inoperable electric pumps. The inability to retrieve fuel post-hurricane was 
demonstrated clearly in Florida in the aftermath of Hurricane Wilma in 2005. 

Ensuring that critical fuel storage sites and gas stations have backup generators or solar/battery pumps on hand 
for localized fuel security will help communities mobilize at the local level until the electrical grid is restored in 
the wake of a disaster. 

The City will map the capacity and location of fuel stations located on O‘ahu, and then identify and prioritize 
the critical sites that are most important to ensure an adequate fuel supply across the island. New policies will 
require critical sites to have backup pumps in place and that these pumps remain operational and are tested on 
a regular basis. Such a policy may also outline a prioritization plan for fuel distribution post-disaster to ensure 
that critical emergency equipment and essential services are able to access fuel reserves, as well as a tool for City 
and State personnel (and potentially the broader public) to know which stations have fuel and backup pumps are 
functioning. 

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
In large scale disasters,  emer-
gency services are oftentimes over-
whelmed. Access to fuel for personal 
vehicles and machinery empowers 
community members and volunteer 
taskforces to mobilize and help them-
selves and others nearby rather than 
relying on all services from in-demand 
emergency response operations. 
Operations such as clearing roads, 
accessing and delivering food, and 
evacuation are just a few examples of 
disaster response actions facilitated 
by fuel access.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Emergency Management, DPP, HESD, 
HFD, State DOH, State DBEDT, FEMA

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge     UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

INDUSTRY, INNOVATION 
AND ARCHITECTURE

Performance Metrics
• Passage of policy to require backup infrastructure
• Percentage of critical fuel sites with backup 
   pumps deployed

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Keeping the Gas Pumping
In 2005, after Hurricane Wilma left much of South Florida without electricity for weeks, 
many gas stations had no way to pump gas in their underground tanks. As a result, 
lawmakers passed a law that required some stations to install transfer switches, which 
enable them to run the pumps off generators.

6 4

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

6 5

Pillar II.  B OU N C I N G   FORWA R D

u

G OAL  2:  Effective Disaster Response

Action    18

Increase O‘ahu’s Preparedness Utilizing 
Scenario Modeling and Artificial Intelligence

u Preparing for future disasters  requires new tools as historic events no longer serve as relevant 
proxies to inform our planning and disaster preparedness. Climate-related hazards are occurring with 
increasing frequency and severity, exacerbating pre-existing vulnerabilities while simultaneously expos-
ing ones previously unknown. Multi-hazard risk assessment tools can now model multiple hazards and 
account for cascading effects, as well as build out projected ‘risk maps’ of disaster impacts from real-time 
data. New flood risk mapping platforms now have the capacity to predict approximate flow direction, speed, 
and depth of floodwaters based on satellite imagery. Such scenarios can provide critical information for 
decision-makers to reduce risk, identify vulnerable areas, help prioritize federal hazard mitigation funds/
projects, and protect lives during a disaster. 

These tools rely on artificial intelligence (AI) and deep machine-learning technology to conduct multi-haz-
ard analyses of critical infrastructure and vulnerable populations. AI platforms can aid both disaster 
preparedness and response with a range of predictions—from where power outages will occur for specific 
disasters to where there will be need for evacuation. With this information, the City can run more realistic 
training scenarios and build collaborative plans to better prepare for emergencies, helping build long-term 
resilience for O‘ahu communities.

The City will utilize new models to better predict disaster impacts, improve response planning, as well as 
inform financial risk management. While to date the City has opted to self-insure, utilizing such new tools 
can help provide actionable information that can assess the potential benefits of parametric insurance 
policies, catastrophe bonds, or reinsurance coverage. The City will update and incorporate applicable data-
sets into its central Lōkahi database, including building metrics (age, building materials, hurricane rating), 
natural environment (soil, slope, elevation, humidity, permeable surfaces), and install appropriate live data 
monitoring systems to capture real-time data. This data can be utilized by a pre-disaster modeling plat-
form (such as One Concern, Geospiza, Pacific Disaster Center, etc.) to help prioritize and establish updated 
training programs for preparedness drills by 2020.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Better modeling of poten-
tial disaster  impacts can 
increase financial resilience 
by increasing public aware-
ness and guiding private in-
vestment choices away from 
hazardous areas. It can also 
help better inform hazard 
mitigation project selection 
and placement ahead of time, 
increasing the chances that 
they can be designed and 
built with enough time to 
include public betterment 
elements like green space 
and transportation improve-
ments. 

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Emergency Management, DIT, CCSR, HESD, HFD, HPD, 
FEMA, NDTPC, Island Insurance, Zephyr Insurance, East-West Center

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge       UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

PEACE, JUSTICE AND STRONG 
INSTITUTIONS

Performance Metrics
•  Multi-hazard analysis is completed and regularly updated 
 • New AI hazard data is made available to stakeholders and 
communities to enable improved risk management to the great-
est extent possible 

S P O T L I G H T

As forecasted events approach 
O‘ahu, intergovernmental, 
private, and non-governmental 
partners are discussing actions 
to prepare and be able to
respond during and immedi-
ately following an event. New 
technologies, modeling, and 
information can better support 
these critical efforts and better 
connect residents and visitors 
with comprehensible informa-
tion that can save lives.

Graphic courtesy of 
Pacific Disaster Center

6 6

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

6 7

Pillar II.  B OU N C I N G   FORWA R D

u

G OAL  3:  Successful Disaster Recovery

Action    19

Develop and Implement a Long-Term 
Disaster Recovery Plan for O‘ahu 

u While the basic aim  is to bounce back after a disaster, our real goal should be to “bounce forward.” 
Building back better and stronger after disaster hits requires a pre-approved Long-Term Disaster Recovery 
Plan, or O‘ahu may be forced to rebuild infrastructure in harm’s way. Communities often measure their 
disaster preparedness by their investment in pre-disaster mitigation, disaster preparedness, and disaster 
response programs. Historically, long-term disaster recovery has received far less attention and resources 
than immediate disaster response. In fact, the City currently does not have a document that details our 
strategy for managing a long-term recovery from a large natural disaster hitting O‘ahu. 

A strong plan that articulates what must happen beyond the immediate wake of a disaster can be the dif-
ference between prolonged economic, social and environmental stress, and an efficient and full recovery. 
On Kaua‘i, the economy took more than a decade to recover to pre-disaster levels in the wake of Hurricane 
Iniki. In addition, a long-term recovery plan is a critical component to help ensure that O‘ahu fully lever-
ages critical federal resources required for a prompt rebuilding effort. A long-term disaster recovery plan 
provides a roadmap for smart recovery and rebuilding of housing, health and social services, infrastructure, 
and natural and cultural resources, and serves as a critical tool to ensure coordination between community, 
City, State, and Federal agencies and institutions. Following a disaster, 50 years of urban redevelopment 
can happened in five to ten years. Ideally, a long-term recovery plan maps pathways for the community to 
re-position and re-build that development in new, smarter, more resilient ways as compared to its pre-di-
saster state. 

Within one year the City will create a full-time Hazard Mitigation and Long-Term Recovery position and 
secure funding to create a long-term recovery plan in conjunction with input from a diverse group of stake-
holders. Creating a Long-term Recovery Committee, consisting of these community leaders, local agencies 
and experts will identify unmet human and social recovery needs, and guide creation of the plan. Within 
two years this Committee will publish a recovery plan, which will remain iterative as the Manager con-
tinues to work with the Committee to update planning and keep strong relationships that will spring into 
immediate action in the event of a disaster. 

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
A long-term recovery plan  can 
provide a framework for large-scale 
redevelopment, rezoning, and re-po-
sitioning of critical infrastructure 
and development patterns following a 
disaster. Pre-planning can result in a 
number of benefits, including rebuild-
ing damaged structures/infrastruc-
ture to be more resilient, targeting 
new investment to safer areas, and 
accelerating long-term visions and 
resilience ‘moonshot’ goals of the 
City. Providing special provisions for 
vulnerable and resource-scarce areas 
can reduce  inequality and speed 
neighborhood recovery, as seen in 
New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and Resiliency, 
DEM, ENV, DPP, DTS, BWS, HESD, HFD, HPD, American 
Red Cross of Hawai‘i, HUD, FEMA, UH, NDPTC, Hawaiian 
Electric, Waikīkī Improvement Association, Hawai‘i Com-
munity Foundation, Island Insurance, Zephyr Insurance 

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge      UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

PEACE, JUSTICE AND STRONG 
INSTITUTIONS

Performance Metrics
• Recovery position in the City is created and filled
• Long term disaster recovery plan, with 
   accompanying financing toolkit, developed, 
   implemented and shared with the public

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Photo by Paradise Helicopters 
and Extreme Exposure

A recovery plan allows disaster assistance funds to actually move infrastructure and re-
build in a more resilient posture. In the wake of the 1960 Tsunami, Hilo completely moved 
a portion of downtown to higher ground—and the 2018 Hurricane Lane flooding had 
relatively minor damage to what is now soccer fields and parkland as a result.

6 8

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

6 9

Pillar III.

Climate 
Security 

Tackling Climate Change by Reducing
Emissions and Adapting to Impacts
 As an isolated island with a heavy reliance on imported fossil fuel, O‘ahu is on 
the climate change front line. Impacts from sea level rise, increased rainfall flooding, 
and extreme heat are happening in real time all around us. Recent king tide inundation, 
severe beach erosion along the North Shore and Ko‘olau Loa, and the April 2018 “rain 
bomb” flooding demonstrate the need to act. Bond rating agencies are now looking at how 
well municipalities understand their climate risk and are preparing for the future. The 
benefit is clear: the sooner we transition to a clean energy economy and design resilient 
infrastructure to lower our risk to life and property, the greater the cost savings to current 
and future generations. Climate change is the challenge of our time, but it also provides the 
opportunity to design for multiple benefits and improve our community conditions and 
quality of life while protecting the places that we love.

Photo by Rafael 
Bergstrom

The City has pledged to uphold 
the Paris climate agreement 
and drastically reduce our 
emissions in an effort to slow 
negative climate impacts and 
reduce the billions of dollars 
we export out of our local 
economy every year to pay for 
fossil fuels.
The Administration and City Council have 
established clear goals and commitments: 
100 percent renewable City fleet by 2035; 
100 percent renewable electricity by 2045; 
and carbon neutrality by 2045. The City is 
mid-way through the process of developing 
a detailed Climate Action Plan (CAP) that 
will provide a comprehensive roadmap to 
achieve these aggressive renewable energy, 
decarbonized transportation, and carbon 
neutrality goals. While we know that our 
current commitments and state law ensure 
that Honolulu will at minimum have a 
carbon neutral target by 2045, the CAP may 
recommend a path that allows us to acceler-
ate this timeline.

The City has already started taking 
action toward our climate goals. We are 
changing our streetlights island-wide to 
high-efficiency LEDs, we’re capturing our 
biogas from wastewater treatment, and 
we’re building an all-electric rail sys-
tem. In 2018, the City completed its first 
community greenhouse gas inventory 
and was selected to become a Bloomberg 
Philanthropies American Cities Climate 
Challenge awardee. 

Honolulu is in position to be the most 
active, forward-thinking city in the nation 
on climate change. This pillar presents a 
two-pronged approach that tackles our 
climate change pollution and emissions 
while simultaneously increasing climate 
resilience for local communities. Both ap-
proaches will be formalized through a more 
detailed Climate Action Plan and a Climate 
Adaptation Strategy, respectively—yet we 
know there are early actions we can take 
now to ensure continued progress. A new 
carbon-free economy is coming and this 
Strategy begins to lay the groundwork for a 
fossil-fuel free future. 

To keep up momentum and turn challenges 
into opportunities, we will:

GOAL 1
Clean Energy Economy
Action 20   Reduce Taxpayer Expense and Increase 
Renewable Energy through a City-Wide 
 
 
Energy Performance Contract

Action 21  Establish an Energy Benchmarking 
 

Standard for O‘ahu Commercial Buildings

Action 22  District Cooling: Tap the Ocean to Cool 
 

our Buildings

Action 23  Expand Opportunities for Methane 
 

Capture and Re-Use

GOAL 2
Clean Ground Transportation
Action 24  Expand Electric Vehicle Charging 
 

Infrastructure Island-Wide

Action 25  Accelerate Carbon-Free New 
 

Mobility Options

Action 26  Ensure Equal Access to Sustainable 
 

Transportation Options and Cost Savings

Action 27  Transform the City’s Public Fleet to 100 
 

Percent Renewable Fuel by 2035

GOAL 3
Climate Resilient Future
Action 28  Chart a Climate Resilient Future by 
 
 

Creating and Implementing a Climate 
Adaptation Strategy

Action 29  Protect Beaches and Public Safety 
 

with Revised Shoreline Management Rules

Action 30  Nourish and Preserve Beach 
 
 

Environments through Innovation 
and Partnerships

Action 31  Establish a Storm Water Enterprise Fund 
 

to Better Finance Storm Water Management

Action 32  Deploy Sustainable Roof Systems to Manage 
 

Urban Heat and Rainfall

Action 33  Keep O‘ahu Cool by Maintaining and 
 

Enhancing the Community Forest

Action 34  Minimize Economic and Property Risk 
 

within the Ala Wai Canal Watershed

7 0

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y     «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

7 1

Pillar III.  C LIM AT E  SE CUR IT Y

u

G OAL   1:  Clean Energy Economy 

Action    20

Reduce Taxpayer Expense and Increase Renewable 
Energy through City-Wide Energy Performance 
Contracts

u To advance our goal of 100 percent renewable energy by 2045, the City will issue a facility-wide energy 
service performance contract (ESPC) under HRS Chapter 36-41 to finance and install energy conservation 
and renewable energy projects at City buildings and properties. Approximately two percent of our island’s 
total emissions result from municipal building and facility energy use. The City will: solicit pre-qualified con-
tractors to conduct an investment grade audit and identify energy retrofit and renewable energy development 
opportunities; establish a baseline database of municipal buildings and facilities that track and verify efficien-
cy gains; and, execute one or more contracts to move towards energy self-reliance. This effort will start with a 
targeted ESPC effort for the City’s Department of Parks and Recreation. 

The City has already successfully entered into several limited-scope ESPC’s in the past including a $46 mil-
lion island-wide LED retrofit of 53,500 streetlights through the Department of Design and Construction and a 
$33 million department-wide energy efficiency program implemented by the Board of Water Supply. Individ-
ual solar panel installations, lighting upgrades, and other energy projects continue to be initiated by multiple 
City departments on an ad-hoc basis, but a comprehensive ESPC approach across the entire City will help 
maximize efficiency, link efficiency, production, and storage in new ways and speed project deployment—all of 
which will result in increased fiscal savings. Similar to recent comprehensive efforts by the University of Ha-
wai‘i community colleges, a multi-pronged approach to municipal energy management (or “energy efficiency 
plus”) will first reduce total energy demand through building retrofits, then deploy a combination of renewable 
energy, storage, and demand management solutions to offset a significant portion of the remaining energy 
required from outside sources.

Retrofit and renewable energy projects typically require large initial capital investments that can have rela-
tively long payback periods. Utilizing an ESPC in a public-private partnership with Energy Service Companies 
(ESCO) pre-vetted through the State of Hawai‘i’s procurement office under Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (HRS) 
Chapter 36-41 can help the City implement retrofits and renewable energy projects in a timely and cost-effec-
tive manner. A private ESCO can help the City find, design and implement energy conservation and renewable 
energy opportunities at City facilities that will be paid back through the energy bill savings. The Hawai‘i State 
Energy Office can offer technical support to the City in evaluating ESPC opportunities, including compiling 
building plan information for use in solicitations, reviewing draft solicitations and contracts, and evaluating 
proposed energy conservation measures. ESPCs benefit the City because they provide the upfront investment 
and assume the technical and performance risks associated with the building improvements. 

City energy savings translate not only into taxpayer savings, but also a lower cost of living for residents. The 
City owns and operates 12 public housing properties, making up a total of 1,180 units. An ESPC would ease the 
utility burden for occupants while lowering operating expenses for the City. Conservative electricity savings 
estimates indicate a 10-30 percent savings per residence as a result of a retrofit, which would save housing 
occupants $176 to $526 on an annual basis.

7 2

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
By retrofitting building sys-
tems at City-owned properties, the 
City will be proactively upgrading 
aging infrastructure and reduc-
ing public expenditure on energy 
costs. Reducing consumption of 
electricity and natural gas will both 
reduce reliance on imported oil and 
natural gas and improve air quality 
in O‘ahu's  denser regions.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Design and Construction, BFS, DFM, 
DLM, DPR, Resilience Office, State Energy Office, Hawai‘i 
Energy, Hawai‘i Green Growth Local2030 Hub, Helping 
Hands Hawai‘i

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge     UN SDG

CLEAN ENERGY

CLIMATE ACTION

AFFORDABLE AND 
CLEAN ENERGY

Performance Metrics
•  Decrease City purchase of external energy 
•  Increase in kW of renewable energy generation 
  produced at City facilities
•  Amount of greenhouse gas emissions avoided 
  by increased efficiency and renewable energy 
   production

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Energy Savings 
for Climate Resilience
The City of Boston is imple-
menting a municipal build-
ing program called Renew 
Boston Trust (RBT). The 
program identifies energy 
efficiency retrofit opportu-
nities at municipal buildings 
and facilities citywide, and 
dedicates the resulting 
operating savings to fund 
the City’s climate resilience 
investments, which make 
the City safer but do not 
produce financial operating 
savings on their own.
   Boston has learned 
to take a comprehensive 
approach to its program 
by including almost all 
City-owned buildings and 
facilities in its initial request 

for qualifications. The City found that a focus on a smaller 
set of high-energy use buildings would lose the benefits of 
scale, which allow the cash-flow from energy conservation 
measures with short-term payback periods to subsidize 
measures with longer-term payback.

Photo credit: 
Honolulu Board of 
Water Supply

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

7 3

Pillar III.  C LIM AT E  SE CUR IT Y

u

G OAL   1:  Clean Energy Economy 

Action    21

Establish an Energy Benchmarking Standard 
for O‘ahu Commercial Buildings

u Fifteen percent of O‘ahu’s greenhouse gas pollution results from commercial and municipal build-
ing energy use. By implementing a benchmarking standard for building energy we can advance our City goal 
of carbon neutrality by 2045. Benchmarking tracks a building’s actual energy performance over time, and 
also allows the transparent comparison of performance against other “peer group” buildings. This compar-
ison helps identify opportunities for technological and operational energy efficiency improvements. Bench-
marking is an important component to building energy management and the most effective tools rely on the 
disclosure of benchmarking results for instant comparison. Benchmarking can help ensure that building 
systems, such as mechanical, electrical, and ventilation, are operating at optimal efficiency as intended by 
building architects and engineers. The performance of these systems can degrade over time, which leads to 
energy inefficiencies. Retro-commissioning is the tune-up process that reduces energy demand, provides 
operational cost savings, and improves occupant comfort through consistent temperature control and bet-
ter indoor air quality. Regular retro-commissioning can also help extend the life of existing systems, defer 
expensive upgrades, and ensure timely identification of energy-efficiency opportunities. Simple disclosure 
and data transparency enable future policy creation and enhance decision-making from public and private 
actors alike.

The City will develop a “better buildings” energy efficiency policy to require annual energy benchmarking 
and disclosure, set a retro-commissioning schedule, and define phased energy intensity reduction targets. 
The policy should establish thresholds for participation based on building type (e.g., office, hotel), size, date 
of construction, and ownership type (e.g., private, municipal). It should also define unique requirements 
for different building types to reflect their energy demands. Energy retrofit measures would be defined for 
buildings that are non-compliant with the energy intensity targets based on annual benchmarking results. 
In addition, the City will work with State agencies such as Public Benefits Fund Administrator, other coun-
ty agencies, and the local utility, among others, to ensure that energy use data is more broadly shared for 
decision-making; and be designed around automated disclosure methods such as the U.S. Department of 
Energy’s Green Button Program.

7 4

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and Resiliency; 
DDC, DFM, DPP, Chamber of Commerce Hawai‘i, Hawai‘i 
Energy, Hawaiian Electric

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge    UN SDG
 

 

CLEAN ENERGY

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

INDUSTRY, INNOVATION 
AND ARCHITECTURE

Performance Metrics
•  % of commercial/municipal buildings complying 
  with benchmarking policy
•  % of reporting buildings that achieve ENERGY 
  STAR score >75
•  % building energy efficiency improvement by 
  building type (e.g., office, hotel)

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
An energy benchmarking and disclosure 
program will provide information to potential 
building tenants on the cost of future utility 
bills when comparing real estate options and 
enhance consumers’ ability to choose a high 
performance building. Identification of building 
energy retrofit opportunities through annual 
benchmarking and regular retro-commission-
ing would minimize energy waste and reduce 
utility bills, which can reduce the cost of doing 
business in the city. The reduced energy demand 
on the power grid would help alleviate O‘ahu’s 
over-reliance on imported oil, and contribute to 
local air quality benefits from reduced fossil fuel 
use in electricity generation. In addition, energy 
benchmarking and retro-commissioning will 
reduce energy costs at City buildings and facil-
ities covered by the program, reducing public 
expenditure.

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Seattle's Energy Use Benchmarking Ordinance
Seattle's Energy Use Benchmarking Ordinance requires owners of non-residential and multifami-
ly buildings (20,000 sf or larger) to track energy performance and annually report to the City of 
Seattle. Energy performance of all buildings included in the ordinance is publicly available as a 
browser-based interactive viewer. The City also requires that building owners or managers disclose a 
Statement of Energy Performance Report with tenants or buyers on request. The 2015 performance 
data showed an average 2.7 percent decrease in energy consumption from the previous year for the 
3,300 reporting properties, which represents energy use savings of around 81 barrel of oil equivalent.

Graphic credit: City of Seattle Office of Sustainability & Environment

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

7 5

Pillar III.  C LIM AT E  SE CUR IT Y

u

G OAL   1:  Clean Energy Economy 

Action    22

District Cooling: 
Tap the Ocean to Cool our Buildings

u Cooling our buildings is currently responsible for six percent of our island carbon pollution 
emissions—and will grow over time as our climate heats up. In downtown Honolulu, most buildings are 
individually cooled with conventional air conditioning systems that rely on refrigerant coolants and stand-
alone electric chillers. However, the area is uniquely situated to take advantage of its proximity to naturally 
cold seawater in the deep waters offshore to provide a nature-based clean energy building cooling option. A 
seawater air conditioning system brings deep seawater to a central cooling station on shore, where it chills 
a supply of freshwater that circulates through a network of underground pipes which cool office buildings 
connected to the district cooling system. The cold district cooling water is circulated through buildings’ 
existing chilled water air conditioning systems, eliminating the need to cool water on-site with individ-
ual conventional electric chillers. A district cooling system for commercial and residential properties in 
downtown Honolulu at full operation would reduce our need to import 178,000 barrels of oil per year and 
significantly advance our goals of 100 percent renewable electricity and carbon neutrality by 2045.

The City will lead by example and connect our municipal buildings in the downtown Civic Center area to 
the district cooling network, and will report the associated cost, energy, and greenhouse gas emission sav-
ings to the broader public and private community. To ensure new construction maximizes energy efficiency 
opportunities, the City will adopt a policy requiring new buildings in the district cooling project area to be 
constructed as “district cooling-ready” to support easy potential future connection to the system and also 
take advantage of Hawai‘i Energy rebates that can incentivize connection. The City will also develop a cool-
ing system retrofit program for existing buildings in the distribution area to help streamline the permitting 
process for retrofits required to support system connection. 

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
By reducing energy expense, fuel 
use, and greenhouse gas emissions 
from City operations, this project aligns 
with the City’s sustainability goals and 
reduces our risk exposure to global fossil 
fuel markets and supply chains. At full 
build-out, implementation of an efficient 
district cooling system will reduce energy 
demand on the power grid by one percent, 
and help alleviate O‘ahu’s over-reliance 
on imported oil. Replacing individual air 
conditioners with a district system will 
also decrease evaporation loss of potable 
fresh water on island by more than 260 
million gallons per year, and therefore 
additionally reduce energy use for fresh 
water treatment and pumping, as well. 
In addition, district cooling will reduce 
utility bills for downtown customers, 
and reduce public expenditure by cutting 
costs for cooling City properties.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Facility Maintenance, DDC, DTS, Resil-
ience Office, Hawai‘i Community Foundation, Hawai‘i 
Energy, Honolulu Seawater Air Conditioning, LLC

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge    UN SDG

CLEAN ENERGY

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

INDUSTRY, INNOVATION 
AND ARCHITECTURE

Performance Metrics
•  Percent of eligible municipal buildings connected 
  to district cooling system
•  Energy reduction/greenhouse gas emissions 
  reduction by all participants on system

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Toronto’s Cooling Off—With A Lake 
Like our Pacific Ocean, Lake Ontario’s 
depths remain cold even when the surface 
warms in the summer. Toronto is harness-
ing this cold water and cooling buildings in 
the downtown core in the summer months. 
Three high-density polyethylene pipes 
pump water from a depth of 83 meters and 
transport it to heat exchangers that cool 
water in the district’s chilled water qqsup-
ply loop. More than 30 major commercial 
or multifamily buildings are connected, 
including Toronto’s City Hall. The system is 
currently being expanded to serve an addi-
tional 20 million square feet of commercial 
and residential buildings. 

7 6

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

7 7

Pillar III.  C LIM AT E  SE CUR IT Y

u

G OAL   1:  Clean Energy Economy 

Action    23

Expand Opportunities for 
Methane Capture and Re-Use 

u Methane gas is created as a result of  decomposing organic waste in landfills and as a byproduct 
of some wastewater treatment processes. In fact nearly five percent of O‘ahu’s total greenhouse gas 
emissions result from waste sector methane. Methane is currently burned or “flared” to minimize the 
dangerous global warming impacts of methane in the atmosphere. However, this still results in signif-
icant emissions. If captured and processed, this biogas can be transformed into a renewable fuel and 
used to reduce demand from current fossil-fuel energy sources. Methane gas can be used onsite by City 
facilities—to provide heat for plant processes or combusted to produce electricity to power operations. 
It can also be turned into biofuel for use by City or other fleet vehicles. Finally, it can be processed 
into renewable natural gas (RNG) and distributed through existing pipelines for use island-wide in 
homes and businesses—while also providing revenue to the City. This model is currently being used at 
Honouliuli Wastewater Treatment Plant. 

The City will explore the feasibility for additional methane capture at other wastewater treatment 
plants and landfill sources on the island. The City will collect information on the methane generation 
potential of each facility and identify onsite uses for the biogas (e.g., heat and power co-generation, vehi-
cle fleet refueling station) or opportunities to sell RNG to offsite customers. The City will also evaluate 
the economic viability of other landfill gas collection and reuse opportunities, including at the Kapaa 
and Kalaheo Sanitary Landfill.

7 8

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Powering wastewater treatment 
plants with methane produced onsite 
provides energy source redundancy, 
which will help protect against infra-
structure failure during an extreme 
weather event. Using renewable biogas 
in fleet vehicles instead of gasoline 
or diesel will improve air quality and 
reduce fossil fuel emissions. Bene-
ficial reuse of captured methane for 
wastewater treatment plant operations 
and fleet vehicles will reduce public 
expenditure on fuel. Providing locally 
produced RNG to homes and business-
es will also reduce O‘ahu’s reliance on 
imported fossil fuels.

S P O T L I G H T

In December 2018, the City 
unveiled the first-ever RNG 
facility in Hawai‘i, located 
at the Honouliuli Wastewa-
ter Treatment Plant in ‘Ewa 
Beach. The RNG project 
will displace about 15,000 
barrels of oil per year and 
reduce annual GHG emis-
sions equaling the remov-
al of approximately 400 
gasoline-powered cars. The 
project is expected to yield 
nearly $1.6 million annual-
ly in revenue for the City’s 
Sewer Fund.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability 
and Resiliency, ENV

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge     UN SDG

WASTE REDUCTION

RESPONSIBLE CONSUMPTION 
AND PRODUCTION 
AFFORDABLE AND
CLEAN ENERGY

Performance Metrics
• % gas captured for beneficial use
•  Amount of energy use displaced by captured biogas

Photo credit: City and County of Honolulu

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

7 9

Pillar III.  C LIM AT E  SE CUR IT Y

u

G OAL   2:  Clean Ground Transportation

Action    24

Expand Electric Vehicle Charging 
Infrastructure Island-wide

u In 2017, the Caldwell administration committed the City to achieving 100 percent renewable fuel 
use in ground transportation for all City fleets by 2035 and all private vehicles on island by 2045. Broad 
adoption of electric vehicles (EV) powered by renewable electricity is a primary strategy to achieve this 
commitment and reduce transportation emissions on the island. On-road transportation emissions make 
up a fifth of all carbon pollution on O‘ahu, and must be reduced to zero by 2045. 

One of the major barriers to widespread EV adoption is the lack of access to a comprehensive and reliable 
EV charging station network. The City will install additional charging stations at its facilities through-
out O‘ahu to support development of an island-wide network of intelligent, grid-connected EV charging 
stations. This network will provide opportunities for both the public and City employees to charge EVs in 
strategic locations around the island. Future installations will be designed to complement Honolulu’s rail 
system and transit-oriented development to encourage a “carbon-free corridor” along the rail route. In ad-
dition to showing leadership through publicly-financed projects, the City will need to work in partnership 
with the utility and private charging companies to achieve a robust private network of EV infrastructure 
to further accelerate EV adoption on O‘ahu. On the public fleet side, the City will move forward with the 
replacement of diesel buses with battery electric options and bus charging infrastructure.

Along with its counterparts at the County of Hawai‘i, County of Kaua‘i, and County of Maui, the City is 
requesting Volkswagen Settlement funds to immediately accelerate the deployment of EV charging infra-
structure across City-owned facilities and properties. With these funds, the City aims to install 30 Level 2 
EV charging units at 15 City-owned parking facilities across the island, and two Direct Current Fast Char-
gers at City-owned fleet maintenance facilities. The City will reform its policy regarding free EV charging 
to ensure that EV drivers both provide revenue to the City to offset utility costs and regularly rotate out of 
EV charging stalls once charging is complete. The City will also update building codes to ensure that new 
residential and parking structures are EV-ready. 

Following these early actions, the City will develop a comprehensive EV Readiness Plan to guide commu-
nity-wide expansion of EV infrastructure and identify additional specific policies and actions to encourage 
private investment in charging infrastructure and accelerate consumer adoption of EVs. This plan will 
provide guidance directing additional EV building codes and standards, strategies for expediting permit-
ting of EV infrastructure projects, and a siting analysis to identify optimum locations for privately-installed 
charging stations for public use based on factors including land use, residential and employment densities, 
and location within the wider EV charging network.

8 0

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Hawai‘i currently has the high-
est gasoline and diesel prices in the 
United States, which is one of the major 
contributing factors to O‘ahu’s high 
cost of living. Widespread adoption of 
EVs will reduce not only out of pocket 
fuel costs for residents, but also reduce 
maintenance and operating expenses. 
In a disaster, EVs have the potential to 
power homes with their stored energy 
even if the grid is down. Eventually, 
autonomous vehicles will likely utilize 
EV technology to shuttle commuters 
around the island and the EV charging 
grid we build now will help power the 
autonomous fleets of the future.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and Resiliency, 
DDC, DFM, DPR, DTS, Hawaiian Electric, Hawai‘i Energy, 
Ulupono Initiative

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge     UN SDG

CLEAN ENERGY

CLIMATE ACTION

INDUSTRY, INNOVATION 
AND INFRASTRUCTURE

Performance Metrics
• Number of public EV charging points installed 
  on City properties
•  Number of individual cars charged per day 
  at City properties
•  Penetration of EV charging stations in 
  neighborhoods across O‘ahu

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Electric Vehicles—
The Day & Night Power Player
The electrification of transportation 
is a critical element of meeting our 
100 percent renewable energy goal. 
Electric vehicles can capture, store, 
and utilize solar power at the height of 
the day, when the grid is full. In a zero 
carbon economy, EVs can charge with 
solar power while at workplaces, and 
then power homes in the afternoon 
and evening. For this reason, EVs are 
a critical element to accommodating 
more homes with solar PV panels 
since they absorb extra solar capacity. 
Instead of being an extra grid burden, 
EVs can be the critical storage key 
that unlocks our grid’s potential to 
accelerate towards our 100 percent 
clean energy commitment. To this 

end, workplace charging stations must be 
quickly expanded. This nexus between day 
and night charging has already been identi-
fied in Hawaiian Electric’s “Electrification of 
Transportation Strategic Roadmap.” 

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

8 1

Pillar III.  C LIM AT E  SE CUR IT Y

u

G OAL   2:  Clean Ground Transportation

Action    25

Accelerate Carbon-Free New Mobility Options 

u The cost of transportation is 34 percent higher for O‘ahu residents than the national average. Micro-
mobility has the potential to vastly reduce transportation expenses and greenhouse gas pollution on O‘ahu. 
In 2017 there were 786,382 registered vehicles for Honolulu’s driving-aged population of 781,033. This 
collection of cars, vans, pickups and other trucks, and motorcycles and mopeds outnumbers the amount of 
people who can operate them. More than 80 percent of these vehicles are single occupancy vehicles (SOVs) 
and approximately 90 percent gasoline-powered. For local commutes, 67 percent of commuters drive 
SOVs, while 14 percent carpool, 7 percent use public transit, 5 percent walk, 5 percent work at home, and 4 
percent use other means of travel. Due to our island geography, land-use patterns, and concentration of jobs 
in the primary urban core, the proliferation of SOVs leads to traffic congestion and commute times that are 
among the worst in the nation. Ground transportation produces 20 percent of our greenhouse gas pollution 
on island. This takes a toll not only on our quality-of-life, health, and well-being, but also on our wallets.  

To address these issues, the City is committed to Transit-Oriented Development along the new 20-mile, 
21-station rail transit system, and aims to develop a Carbon-Free Corridor to maximize clean and sustain-
able new mobility options for residents and commuters. The City will: 

 
 
 
 
 

• Convene a New Mobility Working Group to implement a network of clean and sustainable 
    micromobility options such as e-scooters, bike share, car share, and other dockless technologies. 
• Identify opportunities to increase service in areas that would result in significant reductions in 
   personal vehicle use, as well as improved transit access to high-need populations (e.g., based on age, 
   economics, and equity). 

The Administration will develop a transportation demand management policy which will include provi-
sions for carpool/vanpool and bicycle parking, trip reduction plans, and transit-supportive infrastructure 
development. The City will implement TOD strategies that require developers to provide connectivity and 
streetscape improvements in return for bonus height and density waivers. The City will develop a single 
transit “wayfaring app” to simplify route choice as well as a tap card to facilitate payment and transfers 
across all modes of transit. The City will also increase the amount of protected bike lanes by 40 percent 
over the next four years, which will serve as a safe conduit for not only bikes but multiple new micromobili-
ty options for island residents.

8 2

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Implementing new mobility options 
will improve affordability and reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions by providing 
zero emission low-cost transportation 
as a viable alternative to fossil-fueled 
SOVs. It will save time for residents by 
reducing congestion and time searching 
for parking; improve air quality, health 
and well-being; and re-connect com-
munities with each other and our island 
home. It will empower residents and 
improve our economy by conveniently 
and affordably connecting housing to 
job opportunities, especially in our 
primary urban core.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Transportation Services, DDC, DFM, DIT, 
DPP, HART, Resilience Office, Elemental Excelerator 

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge    UN SDG

CLEAN ENERGY

CLIMATE ACTION

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

Performance Metrics
• Increased public transit mode share
• Increased number of bus passes/Holo passes 
  purchased 
•  Reduced commute times and congestion

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

O‘ahu Residents Want to Bike
After only six months in operation, Biki 
Bikeshare in Honolulu was the 8th most 
heavily used bikeshare system in the 
U.S. In its first year alone, Biki users 
logged 838,662 total rides—64 percent 
of which were by O‘ahu residents. In 
2018 that number kept rising, with users 
logging in more than 1 million rides at 
2.8 rides per bike per day, compared to 
the industry average of 1.7. Biki riders 
report other perks: 27 percent lost 
weight and eight percent reduced their 
cost of living by eliminating a car from 
their household. As of May 2019, Biki 
was named the 6th most used bikeshare 
system in the nation. It’s clear that Biki’s 
success is happening despite poor bik-
ing infrastructure. On that note, among 
large cities, Honolulu ranked 16th out of 
18 for “ease of travel” by bicycle. Resi-
dent ratings for ease of travel by bicycle 

are also lower than the national bench-
mark. O'ahu needs a significantly expanded 
bicycle network to meet the micromobility 
demands of our residents.

Photo credit: Bikeshare Hawai‘i

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

8 3

Pillar III.  C LIM AT E  SE CUR IT Y

u

G OAL   2:  Clean Ground Transportation

Action    26

Ensure Equitable Access to Sustainable 
Transportation and Cost Savings

u The costs of greenhouse gas pollution and the impacts of climate change disproportionately affect 
low- to moderate-income (LMI) communities which not only are most vulnerable to climate change shocks 
and stresses, but have the longest commuting distances and higher overall energy burdens. Too often, clean 
technologies such as rooftop solar photovoltaic (PV), energy conservation upgrades, and electric and hybrid 
vehicles, are priced beyond the reach of these communities. Higher prices for EVs and hybrids prevent LMI 
residents from taking full advantage of the long-term cost of living savings that new renewable technologies 
bring. With the best available science warning us that time has run out and we must halve our greenhouse 
gas emissions every decade going forward, local governments must empower all sectors of their communi-
ties to act and provide the resources to equalize purchasing power for LMI residents.

The City will develop policy to: (1) create a “retire and replace” rebate program to support purchases of 
low- and zero-emission vehicles for LMI residents; (2) provide additional public transportation benefits 
to residents willing to retire high-emission vehicles; and, (3) raise the fuel tax to directly fund the program, 
while also encouraging other drivers to acquire more fuel efficient cars.

The trade-in rebate program will be based on a successful model implemented by the California Air 
Resources Board and Energy Commission for the San Joaquin Valley. LMI residents who trade-in dirty, 
inefficient vehicles receive a graduated rebate depending on income level and the efficiency of the car they 
choose to purchase: hybrids with +20 mpg, hybrids with +35 mpg, or electric vehicles. The rebate will be 
administered at the point-of-sale, with discounts on the purchase price provided through automobile deal-
erships and lenders. 

The funds will come from a small increase in the fuel tax. For example, a 5 cent per gallon increase would 
raise approximately $14.5 million per year. At an average rebate of $7,500 per hybrid or EV, the fund would 
support approximately 2,250 clean car purchases per year, and catalyze private market adoption and 
investment, while reducing carbon pollution and lowering fuel demand. Each LMI driver who moves to an 
EV stands to save approximately $1,300 per year in operating and fuel costs. The funds could also be used to 
support public transit options, EV supply equipment, or community-based renewable energy participation.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Increasing hybrid and EV adoption 
will have immediate impacts in terms 
of reducing tailpipe emissions, and 
support the City’s longer-term carbon 
mitigation, clean transportation, and 
socioeconomic equity objectives. It will 
also set the framework for a broader 
carbon pricing mechanism that begins 
to put a true cost on the real cost to tax-
payers for carbon emissions—estimated 
by the EPA to be over $30 per ton.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Budget and Fiscal Services, DCS, State 
DOTax Hawai‘i Energy, Blue Planet Foundation, Chamber 
of Commerce Hawai‘i

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge    UN SDG

CLEAN ENERGY

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

REDUCED 
INEQUALITIES

Performance Metrics
•  # of trade-ins and vehicles sold
•  Average MPG of vehicles sold on O‘ahu 
•  Amount of carbon pollution reduced

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

to scrap their older, higher polluting cars.

The Golden State’s Car Scrap & Replace Program
California has a program for lower-income motorists in certain regions 
to replace old, high polluting vehicles with cleaner technology cars. 
There are two components to the program:
•  Retirement-only – provides $1,500 to lower-income drivers 
 
•  Retire and Replace – provides $4,500 to lower-income drivers that 
 
scrap an old car and buy a cleaner and more fuel-efficient replace-
  ment car. Alternative transportation passes are also available in lieu 
  of a car purchase. 
The “Plus-Up” program is for participants in or near disadvantaged com-
munities, who may be eligible to receive an even higher incentive. To-
gether, this program complements the Scrap and Replace program and 
can provide up to $9,500 towards a purchase of a replacement vehicle.

8 4

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

8 5

Pillar III.  C LIM AT E  SE CUR IT Y

u

G OAL   2:  Clean Ground Transportation

Action    27

Transform the City’s Public Fleet 
to 100 percent Renewable Fuel by 2035 

u Transforming the City’s fleet to 100 percent  renewable fuels by 2035, and converting all public 
and private ground transportation on O‘ahu to renewables by 2045, are critical components of shifting 
our island to a clean energy economy. With 20 percent of O‘ahu’s greenhouse gas emissions coming from 
ground transportation, moving away from fossil fuels is critical to reduce climate risk, meet Paris climate 
agreement goals, and achieve the City’s 100 percent renewable energy and carbon neutrality goal by 2045. 
With a City transportation fuel bill totaling $28.4 million per year, taking advantage of recently introduced 
time-of-use electricity rate structures for mass transit, converting the City bus fleet and other vehicles will 
also reduce operating expenses and taxpayer costs.

The City will take a multi-pronged approach to achieve our fleet transformation goals. First, in addition to 
completing the electrified Honolulu Rail Transit system, the City will purchase 20 battery electric transit 
buses by 2020, install depot charging stations at the Middle Street baseyard, and identify locations within 
the Carbon-Free Corridor to install en-route charging that will take advantage of abundant, low-cost solar 
energy as a fuel source. The City will continue to support the Drive Electric Hawai‘i consortium to motivate 
private market adoption of electric and hydrogen vehicles. Finally, the City will develop a comprehensive 
fleet transition and emission reduction plan for the entire municipal fleet as well as establish a municipal 
vehicle replacement policy that requires the purchase or lease of alternative fuel vehicle options unless 
there are no viable options to perform specific tasks in the near term (e.g., trash hauling, heavy equipment).

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Transforming the municipal fleet to 
electric and renewable vehicles will not 
only decrease greenhouse gas pollution, 
it will reduce our reliance on imported 
crude oil and lower operating, mainte-
nance and other long-term costs. It will 
improve ambient air quality and public 
health by reducing respiratory ailments 
associated with petroleum pollutants. It 
will also decrease noise pollution, and 
help build policies and infrastructure to 
drive O‘ahu’s conversion to renewable 
transportation by 2045.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Budget and Fiscal Services, DFM, ENV, 
HESD, HFD, HPD, BWS, OahuMPO, Hawaiian Electric, 
Blue Planet Foundation

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge    UN SDG
 

 

 

CLEAN ENERGY

CLIMATE ACTION

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

Performance Metrics
•  % of City fleet comprised of hybrid and zero 
  emission vehicles
•  City fuel use and fuel expenditures

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

At A Glance—
The City’s Fleet 

Light and medium 
duty vehicles

3,945  Total vehicles 
2,369 
 
597  
 
542  
180  
70  

Buses
Handivans
Motorcycles

Heavy-duty 
vehicles

$28,351,747*

*How much the City spent on liquid fuel in 2018 

City buses queue 
at the South 
King Street and 
Punchbowl Street 
transit stop

Photo credit: 
City and County 
of Honolulu

8 6

R E S I L I E N T   O ‘ A H U   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

8 7

Pillar III.  C LIM AT E  SE CUR IT Y

u

G OAL   3:  Climate Resilient Future

Action    28

Chart a Climate Resilient Future by Creating 
and Implementing a Climate Adaptation Strategy

u A rapidly changing climate presents severe challenges to our future ability to live on O‘ahu. The impacts 
of sea level rise are commonly associated with climate change, but profound changes in rainfall, flooding, less 
trade winds, heat waves, and ocean acidification may present even more dangerous near-term threats to our 
population. Climate change will require a coordinated effort to protect our island city’s transportation infra-
structure, water systems, and housing stock. The complexity and scale of this challenge require unprecedented 
collaboration and shifts in policy across nearly all City agencies, as well as coordination with the State and 
federal government, private sector, and non-profit groups. 

To align City efforts, the City will create a Climate Adaptation Strategy (CAS) that contains the following 
components: 1) A vulnerability assessment for City infrastructure; 2) Identification of climate-driven risks to 
critical infrastructure, assets, and populations; 3) Evaluation and ranking of risks to identify near-term threats; 
4) Mitigation plans to protect core infrastructure and assets; 5) Coordination of adaptation options across mul-
tiple departments and shared infrastructure needs; 6) Recommendation for Capital Improvement Projects and 
funding vehicles to address shared solutions; and, 7) Key recommendations for land use and policy changes for 
decision-makers and implementing agencies to reduce risk exposure to climate change impacts.

Climate impacts often manifest in the form of water—from flooding to drought.  The CAS will require a compre-
hensive approach to shape urban water infrastructure, consistent with the Hawai‘i Fresh Water Initiative and 
in-line with the “One Water” concept that advocates combining potable, storm, and waste-water efforts and ser-
vices into an aligned effort or entity. The CAS will include strategies to expand opportunities for water capture, 
recharge, and reuse, and to implement green infrastructure components and building design elements to realize 
these opportunities and avoid flood impacts. A core component of adaptation here on O‘ahu will be to establish 
common expectations for long-term water and utility infrastructure planning in order to address the impacts of 
sea level rise and expected flooding predictions, and develop criteria for moving, hardening, retrofitting and/or 
building new infrastructure. 

While the CAS will have a set of definitive goals, it will also be designed to adapt to changing climate conditions 
and infrastructure innovation over time. This will require a continuous working group consisting of City and 
local decision-makers and stakeholders that will continue to refine the strategy and coordinate implementa-
tion. In the long-term, it is recommended that such a planning document be updated and ultimately integrated 
into O‘ahu’s Multi-Hazard Pre-Disaster Mitigation Plan required by FEMA, creating a combined Hazard and 
Climate Resilience Plan as other cities, such as San Francisco, are transitioning to. Additionally, this informa-
tion should become critical inputs within our existing planning framework of the General Plan and Develop-
ment and Sustainable Communities Plans (and their subsequent Zoning Ordinance amendments), the Public 
Infrastructure Map, inform the CIP Budget, and influence other non-City planning efforts such as the O‘ahu 
Regional Transportation Plan and other State Department of Transportation infrastructure planning. There is 
no element of City operations that climate change will not ultimately impact.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and Resiliency, 
BFS, DDC, ENV, DFM, DLM, DPP, DPR, DTS, BWS, UH

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge     UN SDG

CLEAN ENERGY

CLIMATE ACTION

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

Performance Metrics
•  Published Climate Vulnerability Assessment
•  Published Climate Adaptation Strategy

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
A comprehensive CAS will be criti-
cally important to building consistent, 
cohesive climate resilience across 
different neighborhoods and commu-
nities. Alone, any one agency faces 
significant difficulties in addressing 
the hazards faced by a single com-
munity or infrastructure network. A 
City-wide CAS for O‘ahu will support 
fiscal efficiency, coordinated policy and 
projects, greater regional cohesiveness 
and provide our City and partners 
with a holistic scope and detailed 
direction for action. While adaptation 
is a response to impacts, it is also an 
opportunity to improve upon current 
conditions. Changes in how we manage 
water, open and green spaces, and stay 
connected as community can result 
in cleaner, greener, and safer neigh-
borhoods, and enhance and maintain 
those community aspects that we love. 

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Designing for Resilience: 
The City organized an Iwilei-Kapālama Resilience Roundtable with experts 
in urban water management and urban design from 100 Resilient Cities 
Platform Partners Arcadis and CallisonRTKL. This was an intensive, multi-
day program, which included a biking tour of the area, multiple small group 
meetings, two larger half-day workshops, and an evening public presenta-
tion attended by more than 150 community members. The outcomes from 
this work continue to inform transit-oriented development and infrastruc-
ture planning for the area.
  The presentation, “Rising to the Challenges of Resilience and Adapta-
tion,” given by Piet Dircke, Global Leader of Water Management for Arcadis 
in Rotterdam, Netherlands and a video recording can be found under “An-
nouncements” at http://www.honolulu.gov/tod/dpp-tod-home.html.

8 8

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

8 9

Pillar III.  C LIM AT E  SE CUR IT Y

u

G OAL   3:  Climate Resilient Future

Action    29

Protect Beaches and Public Safety 
with Revised Shoreline Management Rules

u Though the shoreline has always been  a dynamic environment, increasing rates of sea-level rise 
and erosion threaten the complete loss of sandy beaches on O‘ahu within this century. When shorelines are 
artificially hardened with seawalls to protect coastal land from erosion, waves are prevented from access-
ing the sand locked behind the wall and beaches narrow and disappear. Since 1949, about 25 percent of 
O‘ahu’s sandy beach has narrowed or been completely lost to artificial hardening of the shoreline. Approxi-
mately 5.5 miles of O‘ahu beaches have been completely lost to erosion since the early 1900s and at least 60 
percent of O‘ahu beaches are currently in a state of chronic erosion. Narrowing beaches bring storm surge 
and high waves closer to homes and buildings along our coast. Seawalls and other armoring restrict natural 
beach replenishment from mauka sands, and we now know that beaches can only continue to survive if 
given room to move and breathe.

Though information on today’s conditions as well as projections for the shoreline have dramatically im-
proved in recent years, the City’s rules that regulate the coastal zone have not been substantially revised 
in decades. The Hawai‘i Coastal Zone Management Act (Hawai‘i Revised Statues Chapter 205A) empow-
ers the counties of Hawai‘i to guide land use development within the coastal zone. Projections for future 
sea-level rise have grown more severe and place-based shoreline erosion modeling provides more accurate 
information for protecting shorelines. In light of these improvements, revisions to city regulations, includ-
ing, but not limited to – Chapter 21A, Flood Hazard Areas; Chapter 23, Shoreline Setbacks; and Chapter 25, 
Special Management Area – are necessary and critical. 
 
Through improvements to these ordinances and their implementing rules, the City will: 1) better protect 
and preserve the natural shoreline, especially sandy beaches; 2) protect and preserve public pedestrian 
access laterally along the shoreline and to the sea; 3) protect and preserve open space and ecosystems along 
the shoreline with improved regulation;  4) reduce risk and damages to properties and structures; and, 5) 
help protect people from the impacts of coastal hazards and climate change, especially sea level rise, ero-
sion, and storm surge.

9 0

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
By preserving beach systems, we 
support a more resilient shoreline that 
protects infrastructure and preserves 
our island way of life, from maintain-
ing space for community gatherings to 
ensuring access for subsistence. 

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Planning and Permitting, DPR, Resilience 
Office, State DLNR, State OP, UH, East-West Center

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge      UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

LIFE BELOW WATER

Performance Metrics
•  Ordinance revisions
•  Environmental and permitting reviews 
  consistent with revised ordinances

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Shifting Sands 
The Counties of Kaua‘i and Maui utilize 
variable shoreline setbacks based on 
different calculations of the historical rate 
of erosion and lot depth. Maui is currently 
investigating the use of a predicted ero-
sion line with sea level rise. In July 2018, 
Mayor Caldwell issued Mayoral Directive 
18-2 (Directive). This Directive is informed 
by the City Climate Change Commission’s 
Sea Level Rise Guidance (Guidance) and 
Climate Change Brief (Brief), both adopt-
ed in June 2018, and the State Climate 
Change Mitigation and Adaptation Com-
mission’s Sea Level Rise Vulnerability and 
Adaptation Report (Report) and Data 
Viewer (Viewer; January 2018). The Direc-
tive, “City and County of Honolulu Ac-
tions to Address Climate Change and Sea 
Level Rise,” among many things requires 
all City departments and agencies to use 
the Guidance, Brief, Report and Viewer as 
resources for planning and decisions, and 
work cooperatively to propose revisions 

Failed and encroaching sea 
walls along the North Shore

Photo credit: 
UH Sea Grant College Program

to shoreline rules and regulations. This 
action carries forward the Directive and 
continued efforts to preserve and protect 
coastal public trust resources, while also 
protecting properties and structures from 
coastal hazards.

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

9 1

Pillar III.  C LIM AT E  SE CUR IT Y

u

G OAL   3:  Climate Resilient Future

Action    30

Protect Coastal Property and Beaches 
Through Innovation and Partnership

u Our beaches act as a natural buffer  to protect our existing coastal communities. However, research 
by the University of Hawai‘i has shown beach loss and coastal erosion to be a chronic trend along the ma-
jority of O‘ahu’s coastlines. Significant degradation of beach width and elevation increases the risk of our 
landward resources to coastal hazards such as storm surge and rainwater flooding. The stresses of beach 
loss, coastal erosion and sea-level rise may increase the severity of storm disaster shocks on coastal parks, 
residences, and roadways island-wide.

The City will partner in efforts to nourish and preserve certain beach environments. O‘ahu’s shorelines are 
dynamic and diverse, and opportunities to protect these environments and adjacent homes or development 
will differ. Sand is the critical and limited resource. In some locations it has been lost due to lateral coastal 
hardening and may sit off-shore, coming and going with the season. Beaches can be restored in many coast-
al areas, but the large scale of the required effort often poses problems for funding and implementation. In 
locations where seasonality and wave energy accommodate, the City will partner with state agencies and 
property owners to support beach restoration projects that avoid lateral armoring and instead promote 
solutions that can preserve beach resources. The City will develop policy to help fund shoreline preserva-
tion and beach nourishment at a localized scale by granting property tax relief to private property owners 
who pool resources to effectively manage their coastal systems. 

In collaboration with state and private entities, the City may also support the identification and recovery 
of supplies of sand currently located in our island’s shallow waters. A survey could be conducted to identify 
potential nearshore sand sources. The potential for the available sand would be evaluated with the ulti-
mate goal to restore eroded coastlines with innovative infrastructure and maintain previously document-
ed beach widths—protecting homes and the public beach asset. The program could eventually result in a 
continuous effort by recovery teams circulating the island to nourish and maintain partnership-supported 
beaches.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Our island’s economy depends on 
our beaches and the maintenance of 
a robust beach environment will be 
key to a sustainable long-term plan for 
O‘ahu. This action can help provide a 
positive alternative approach to coast-
al landowners who cannot install later-
al beach armoring without destroying 
public beach resources.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Planning and Permitting, DPR, Resilience 
Office, State DLNR, State OP, UH, USACE, Oceanit

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge      UN SDG

NATURAL RESOURCE
MANAGEMENT

LIFE BEFORE WATER

PARTNERSHIPS
FOR THE GOALS

Performance Metrics
•  Pilot project successfully funded, constructed 
  and monitored to document results 
•  Shoreline study of potential available sources 
  of sand

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Photo by Asa Ellison

Robust beach environments provide a buffer to properties, structures, and infrastructure from 
coastal hazards, but they are also critical habitat for some of Hawai‘i’s native species. In locations 
where beaches are receding and pinched in between the shoreline and the built environment, 
native habitat may disappear and impact animals’ breeding, rearing, and resting grounds. During 
the King Tide period in summer 2017, one such natural built environment conflict occurred as 
the endangered Hawaiian monk seal F1 came to rest out of the active surf zone and onto Maui’s 
Honoapi‘ilani Highway. Seen here, a volunteer’s car protects the seal from traffic along the heavi-
ly used coastal route. Without measures to adapt to rising sea level and increased coastal ero-
sion, ecosystem and built environment conflicts will only increase.

9 2

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

9 3

Pillar III.  C LIM AT E  SE CUR IT Y

u

G OAL   3:  Climate Resilient Future

Action    31

Establish a Storm Water Enterprise Fund 
to Better Finance Water Management

u With increasingly extreme rainfall  events expected, stormwater flooding and improved infrastruc-
ture must be addressed. The quality of water that enters the City’s drainage system also directly impacts 
the health of our island because these waters flow untreated to our natural waterways and the ocean. While 
we all have shared kuleana for protection of our wai and kai, past development rules and water management 
strategies now challenge our ability to protect our neighborhoods. Though our Rules Relating to Water 
Quality have improved, our impervious surfaces and drainage infrastructure requires a dedicated invest-
ment source to better manage rain and a drainage system built for an era before climate change. Progressive 
stormwater management mirrors natural landscape functions and manages rainfall through green infra-
structure that slows it down, spreads it out, and soaks it in. Where dense urban environments limit our abil-
ity for infiltration, we need to adopt policies that support the capture and reuse of these water resources, so 
they are not degraded and wasted as they make their way to the ocean.

Unlike our other rate-based service water utilities – drinking water under the Board of Water Supply, and 
wastewater under the Department of Environmental Services – there is no dedicated source to address 
stormwater runoff quality and volume under the Department of Facility Maintenance Storm Water Quality 
Branch. Our stormwater management requires additional funding to regularly repair and maintain facili-
ties, as well as meet increasing federal and state management requirements. Although new developments 
must meet improved water management rules, few mechanisms exist for private and government land-
owners to reduce stormwater runoff from existing development. Existing policy does not hold landowners 
accountable for the cost of handling stormwater runoff that falls within existing property lines and that can 
result in water quality impairment and flooding that impacts our residents. 

As empowered by the State Legislature in 2015, the City will develop a Storm Water Enterprise Fund. This 
dedicated funding will support implementation of the Storm Water Management Program Plan that the 
City is required to develop and implement for our Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) and 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NDPES) permit to discharge storm water into streams 
and the ocean. The City will first establish the Fund as a collection mechanism, and then establish an equi-
table structure for fees. Establishing a Storm Water Enterprise Fund is a proven, effective tool to not only 
address growing threats from stormwater quality and potential flooding but to also incentivize responsible 
behavior on private lots across the island.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
A Stormwater Enterprise Fund 
also helps the implementation of other 
City programs, specifically, Urban 
Forestry and Complete Streets. The 
City’s Complete Streets ordinance in-
cludes “trees and landscaping” as one 
of its 10 core principles. Urban street 
stormwater management can provide 
community enhancements and put 
water stewardship in the public eye. 
Furthermore, the fund will also edu-
cate property owners of their contribu-
tions of stormwater runoff, as well as, 
opportunities to mitigate impacts from 
their properties.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Facility and Maintenance, BFS, DPP, 
Hawai‘i Community Foundation

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge     UN SDG

NATURAL RESOURCE
MANAGEMENT

INDUSTRY, INNOVATION 
AND INFRASTRUCTURE
CLEAN WATER
AND SANITATION

Performance Metrics
•  Establishment of a Storm Water Enterprise Fund
•  Development and adoption of a Green 
 

Infrastructure Program/Plan

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

In addition to provid-
ing dedicated revenue 
to local governments 
nationwide to sup-
port expanded storm-
water management 
programs, property 
owners are also incen-
tivized to reduce their 
stormwater fee by 
demonstrating effec-
tive best management 
practices to address 
either stormwater qual-
ity or quantity. Such 
incentives are import-
ant educational and 
property management 
opportunities towards 
improving downstream 
environments, as well 
as, mitigating against 
potential flooding. 

Rainfall runoff at the Kapolei Police Station direct-
ed off the parking lot into a landscaped area that is 
designed to hold, filter, and infiltrate the stormwater 
better managing water quality. 

Photo credit: Department of Facility Maintenance

9 4

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

9 5

Pillar III.  C LIM AT E  SE CUR IT Y

u

G OAL   3:  Climate Resilient Future

Action    32

Deploy Sustainable Roof Systems to 
Manage Urban Heat and Rainfall

u Development produces impervious surfaces  such as roads, sidewalks, driveways, and rooftops. 
These surfaces produce rainfall runoff, contribute to high volumes of flooding during storm events, and 
absorb heat energy from the sun and increase temperature—known as the “urban heat island effect.” By 
adapting our building rooftops we can more effectively combat the adverse effects of rainwater flooding 
and high temperatures. Rooftop design and construction is an untapped resource for solar capture, rainwa-
ter harvesting, urban cooling, and overall green space. Current building practices consistently use impervi-
ous materials such as concrete, asphalt, and metal. The use of concrete (specifically dark concrete), asphalt, 
and metal also contributes to Honolulu’s urban heat island effect. The quality of these materials absorbs 
solar radiation which then exacerbates the severity of heat waves that will impact our city’s future. 

By reclaiming our rooftops we can eliminate the negative impacts of rooftop building materials and repur-
pose available open space to better mitigate present climate impacts. The City will develop a Sustainable 
Roof Systems Ordinance for all commercial, government, and multi-dwelling unit buildings. Sustainable 
rooftop systems include “blue roofs,” “green roofs,” “cool roofs,” and on-site renewable energy generation, 
or combinations thereof. These include reflective roofs, solar PV panels, rainfall catchment, and rooftop 
gardens, among other models. Adequate flexibility in the ordinance will account for special conditions such 
as historical/architectural significance, slope, etc., and strive for “cool roof” applications at a minimum.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Not only do blue-green roofs 
reduce heat impacts outside at the 
street level, they can also significant-
ly improve cooling in a building’s 
interior spaces. Cooler interior spaces 
means a reduced need for air-condi-
tioning which in turn conserves overall 
energy use and therefore reduction in 
greenhouse gas emissions. Sustainable 
rooftop systems can also contribute to 
more green space in the city.

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Planning and Permitting, DDC, 
DFM, Resilience Office

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge    UN SDG
 

 

 

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

INDUSTRY, INNOVATIVE
AND INFRATRUCTURE  

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

Performance Metrics
•  Adopt Sustainable Roof Systems Ordinance
•  Number/Acres of Cool, Blue and Green Roofs 
 

Installed

A living roof atop the 
U.S. Federal Building 
at 50 U.N. Plaza in 
San Francisco, CA.

Photo credit: Patrick Race, 
San Francisco Planning 
Department

9 6

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

9 7

Roof Trends 
In 2018, the City of Denver approved a green buildings ordinance for large buildings and roof 
area additions, requiring a combination of cool roof, solar photovoltaic panels, and/or green 
roof materials (i.e., vegetation). In 2017, the City and County of San Francisco became the first 
U.S. city to mandate solar and green roofs on most new construction. With the passage of this 
legislation, between 15% and 30% of roof space on most new construction projects will incorpo-
rate solar, living roofs, or a combination of both. In 2013 the City of Los Angeles passed a “cool 
roof” ordinance requiring all new residences or existing residences undergoing roof renovations 
to install cool roof products (roof covering materials meeting certain solar reflectance values). 
This includes single-family and multi-family buildings. To aid this transition, the LA Department 
of Water and Power is offering cool roof rebates.

Pillar III.  C LIM AT E  SE CUR IT Y

u

G OAL   3:  Climate Resilient Future

Action    33

Keep O‘ahu Cool by Maintaining 
and Enhancing the Community Forest

u Trees are critical urban infrastructure  and necessary for the health of our communities. Often 
underappreciated, these work horses provide multiple free environmental services and are essential com-
ponents of both climate change adaptation and mitigation. Trees directly address climate change by both 
absorbing and sequestering greenhouse gas pollution and shading us from the increased heat that we are 
experiencing. For City street and park trees, it is important that we maintain accurate information on their 
numbers and condition for asset management. For every dollar spent on tree planting and care, Honolulu’s 
trees provide $3 in benefits. However, the most recent assessment determined that O‘ahu has lost nearly 5 
percent of its total tree canopy over the study area in just four years. The analysis also showed that the loss 
is not from vast clearings, but from thousands and thousands of pinpricks across all of our communities. 
The City’s Division of Urban Forestry receives more requests for the removal of street trees than for plant-
ing. These trends cannot continue if we are to have cool, livable, walkable communities on O‘ahu. We must 
invest in and steward our community forests.

The City will increase the tree canopy across O‘ahu’s communities to 35 percent by 2035. This will be 
accomplished through a combination of policy and planning, people and implementation, and practice 
and maintenance. Effective policy will be informed by regular data collection and analysis. Many individ-
uals are needed at different levels of community to ensure that plans are executed and goals are reached. 
Govern ment efforts alone cannot be effective without supportive community leadership and stewardship. 
In order to maintain O‘ahu’s community forest, the continued practice of monitoring canopy coverage and 
updating poli cies and plans is important, as is the continued integration of trees into municipal programs 
and projects.

The City will expand and update the 2013 Urban Tree Canopy Assessment. Cities with effective programs 
and healthy community forests maintain and update such information to inform planning, investments, 
and rules and ordinances that regulate the community forest. The City will also update tree and tree 
planting standards, guides, and ordinances to realize more and healthier urban trees, as well as, ensure full 
integration into our infrastructure programs, such as Complete Streets, Stormwater, permit reviews, and 
City projects. This will be accomplished with addi tional personnel, use of existing City working groups, 
and collaboration with professional organizations, non-profits, and advocacy groups. Additionally, a strong 
non-profit partner is necessary to support planting and early tree care, and out reach and education to the 
community on the importance of trees to community health.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
The impacts of climate change 
can be observed in increased tem-
peratures, and changes in rainfall 
and wind pat terns. Trees perform 
several services that are crucial to 
our ability to adapt to these chang-
es: they absorb greenhouse gas, 
reduce surface level temperatures 
to cool our communities, capture 
stormwater to reduce flooding, and 
provide important urban habitat. 
By imple menting this resilience ac-
tion, we will make progress towards 
community forestry goals, but also 
facilitate the kinds of environments 
that will allow residents to thrive in 
a changing world, while still having 
beautiful places that make us safer 
and healthier, and that we love.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Parks and Recreation, DDC, DFM, DPP, DES, 
Resilience Office, State DLNR

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge    UN SDG

NATURAL RESOURCE
MANAGEMENT

LIFE ON LAND

CLIMATE ACTION

Performance Metrics
• % canopy coverage
• # of trees planted (city and non-city)
• # of trees approved in plans for new and re-construction 
   projects
• Expanded and updated Urban Tree Canopy Assessment
• Revised tree planting design standards and street 
   tree list
• Updated Urban Reforestation Master Plan

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Citizen Foresters inventory street 
trees on Hikimoe Street in Waipahu

Photo credit: Resilience Office

Tree Ambassadors 
Volunteer Citizen Foresters are creating an inven-
tory of City street and park trees. It’s difficult to 
maintain our assets without knowledge of what 
those assets are! These caring community tree 
ambassadors locate, identify, and measure various 
aspects of these trees, which allows us to quantify 
specific benefits these trees provide for us, from 
cooling and greenhouse gas sequestration, to air 
quality and stormwater runoff management. The 
inventory informs both maintenance of existing 
trees, as well as, opportunities expand the com-
munity forest to achieve our tree goals and ensure 
the benefits of trees are shared by all. To learn 
more, view the growing inventory and become a 
Citizen Forester yourself, visit smarttreespacific.
org/projects/citizenforester. 

9 8

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

9 9

Pillar III.  C LIM AT E  SE CUR IT Y

u

G OAL   3:  Climate Resilient Future

Action    34

Minimize Economic and Property Risk 
within the Ala Wai Canal Watershed

u The Ala Wai Canal Watershed  is the most densely populated watershed in Hawai‘i, account-
ing for nearly 20 percent of O‘ahu’s population. It includes neighborhoods from Maikiki to Pālolo and 
down through Waikīkī and Ala Moana. In addition to mauka conservation lands, the watershed contains 
a wide variety of single-family residences, condominiums, hotels and businesses, as well as many public 
and private schools (more than 30 K-12 campuses and two major universities). The day-time population in 
the watershed surges as a result of several private schools and the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa (UHM), 
employment centers in Waikīkī and at UHM, as well as visitors in Waikīkī. This influx nearly doubles the 
permanent resident population of the area from approximately 200,000 to 400,000. Waikīkī accounts for 
approximately 8 percent of our gross state product, 8 percent of O‘ahu’s total employment, and 16 percent of 
O‘ahu’s property tax revenues. 

The environment and economies in the watershed have local and statewide significance, and they are at 
risk from water quality impairment, storms, and coastal hazards, including  sea level rise . For nearly two 
decades the City and the State, in partnership with the US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), have inves-
tigated flood risk reduction strategies in the watershed. A 1 percent annual chance flood (aka, “100 year 
flood”) will cause massive flooding of the canal, as well as Makiki, Mānoa, and Pālolo Streams, resulting in 
an estimated $1.14 billion in damages to structures alone. The economic risk to Waikīkī alone from a Hurri-
cane Iniki-strength storm striking O‘ahu’s south shore is estimated at $30 billion in direct economic losses 
and structural damage, which would cripple the economies and tax collections of the City and the State. 

The U.S. Congress recently appropriated $345 million for a flood mitigation project in the Ala Wai Wa-
tershed. The City will work with the Ala Wai Watershed Collaboration to develop project improvements 
and other watershed-wide community betterments to address water quality, ecosystem health, and flood 
mitigation to make the USACE project and other community improvements provide as much benefit as 
possible to the broader community.

To facilitate the dedicated support and attention that a flood mitigation project within the watershed will 
need, the City will continue to participate in the Ala Wai Watershed Collaboration to develop a “watershed 
district” and “Community Investment Vehicle” (CIVic) to encourage holistic coordination between stake-
holders, the objectives of which would include, but not be limited to: infrastructure investment and project 
coordination, resilience planning and regulations, watershed data collection, economic security, and 
community engagement. Similar flood control and/or special improvement districts are proven models for 
managing important and complex regions around the country, and the CIVic would be the first of its kind 
to not only address stormwater, but holistically manage resilience. There are currently three City special 
improvement districts on O‘ahu: Waikīkī special improvement district (approved Jun 2000), Fort Street 
Mall (approved May 2001), and Waikīkī Beach (approved May 2015).

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
An important co-benefit of this 
resilience action will be to enhance the 
community engagement process by 
generating innovative green infra-
structure designs and actively involv-
ing stakeholders within the greater Ala 
Wai watershed. A more holistic view of 
the Ala Wai Canal and its adjacent dis-
tricts will encourage initiatives with 
impacts beyond simply flood mitiga-
tion to include improved water quality, 
protection of our mauka forests, and 
enhanced economic activity.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Design and Construction, BFS, DES, 
DFM, DPP, DPR, Resilience Office, BWS, State DLNR, 
USACE, Ala Wai Watershed Collaboration

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge     UN SDG
 

 

 

NATURAL RESOURCE
MANAGEMENT

INDUSTRY, INNOVATION 
AND INFRASTRUCTURE

SUSTAINABLE CITIES 
AND COMMUNITIES

Performance Metrics
•  Completed designs of an Ala Wai Watershed 
    Flood Mitigation Project
•  Establishment of the Community Investment 
  Vehicle (CIVic) for the Ala Wai Watershed
•  Completed construction of an Ala Wai Watershed 
    Flood Mitigation Project

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Water Woes
In 2004, after several hours of rain-
fall over Mānoa Valley the rate of rain 
increased to 5 inches per hour at Lyon 
Arboretum. The already saturated 
ground resulted in greater runoff and 
stream flow and a debris jam at the 
Woodlawn Bridge forced the stream out 
of its channel and resulted in $85 million 
in damages through the community 
and the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa. 
In 2006 O‘ahu communities experi-
enced 40 days of rain, which resulted in 
landslides and private property lost to 
erosion in the upper reaches of the wa-
tershed and significant flooding in the 
coastal low lands. Shown here, buckets 
of mud are carried out of a home on 
Pu‘uhonua Street in Mānoa.

Photo credit: Honolulu Star Advertiser 

1 0 0

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 0 1

Pillar IV.

Community
Cohesion

Leveraging the Strength and 
Leadership of Local Communities
 Community is the essential element of resilience. We know 
this because in the wake of Hurricane Sandy and the Tōhoku Earthquake 
and Tsunami, the neighborhoods that “bounced back” the quickest from 
disaster had the most social connections. We know this because climate 
change solutions like solar panels and electric cars often spread to 
neighbors of early adopters. And we know this because it was community 
that came together and gave selflessly to create homes for 30 formerly 
homeless families at Kahauiki Village. Every pillar of this Resilience 
Strategy is held up by a tight-knit community.

This echoes what the Resilience 
Office heard as we traveled 
the island from neighborhood 
to neighborhood, listening to 
residents identify O‘ahu’s 
major resilience strengths and 
challenges. 
There was resounding agreement that 
social cohesiveness is the greatest 
strength of our O‘ahu community and 
a deep source of pride for our island 
residents. This spirit of community 
is anchored deep in our island values, 
which was defined by the Working 
Group for this pillar as “caring for our 
land and natural resources, building 
strong communities, honoring our 
traditions, providing for our ‘ohana, and 
living a life of responsibility and culture 
of aloha.” To build resilience we need not 
all be emergency workers or clean ener-
gy innovators, we can simply get to know 
our neighbors on all four sides, volunteer 
regularly for a community non-profit, 
and throw a shaka when a stranger lets 
you merge in. That’s building resilience 
at the grassroots level.
 
family, neighbors, and friends are the 
invisible threads that weave the social 
fabric of O‘ahu together. These ties are a 
critical component of strong neighbor-
hoods and thriving cities; well-connected 
communities are better positioned to 
respond to and bounce forward from 
times of shock and stress. The more we 
get to know one another, and the more 
connectivity we build, the better we are 
able to come together when a disaster 
hits. In order to fully empower communi-
ty leadership to foster these connections, 
the City must be as open, transparent, and 
aligned as possible with other island-wide 
institutions, non-profit organizations, 
and individual groups of passionate com-
munity volunteers. Our big challenges 
can be met only if we all take the time to 
listen, weigh our collective strengths, and 
paddle in the same direction together. 

Community connections with our 

The chief actions we will undertake as 
part of this Resilience Strategy include 
the following:

GOAL 1
Empower Grassroots Resilience 
Champions
Action 35   Increase Coordination with 
Neighborhood Emergency 
 
 
Preparedness Groups

Action 36 
 

Increase City-Community 
Relationships through Volunteerism 

Action 37  Weave a Tighter Community With 
 

Neighborhood Gatherings

Action 38  Empower Neighborhoods to Co-Design 
 

Safe and Complete Streets

GOAL 2
Communicate and Affirm 
Island Values
Action 39  Celebrate O‘ahu’s Resilient Past and 
 

Future through Public Art

Action 40  Lift Up Positive Examples of Island 
 

Values in Action 

Action 41  Launch a Place-Based Resilience Training 
 

Program for City Leadership

Action 42  Foster Shared Understanding of Climate 
Change Island-Wide Though an Outreach 
 
 
Campaign

GOAL 3
Island-Wide Alignment
Action 43  Ensure City Partnership in O‘ahu’s 
Collective Impact Resilience Efforts
 

Action 44  Create a City-Community Liaison 
 
 

to Leverage Non-Profit and Volunteer 
Assets

1 0 2

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y 

 

Photo by Grady Timmons

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 0 3

Pillar IV.  CO MMU N I T Y  COH ESI ON

u

G OAL  1 :  Empower Grassroots Resilience Champions 

Action    35

Increase Coordination with Neighborhood 
Emergency Preparedness Groups

u Volunteers who participate in the roughly 20 community preparedness groups across O‘ahu are 
among the most knowledgeable residents about hazards their communities face and are valuable resources 
for helping the City understand how best to assist communities in times of crisis. They also serve on the 
front lines of disaster response. Ensuring these community groups have consistent communication lines 
with the City, and the resources they need to connect and prepare local residents is fundamental for build-
ing resilience at the neighborhood level.

The City will work with these local leaders to build upon their existing strengths, expand resident connectivity, 
and provide additional capacity through the following:

1. Leveraging the City’s new partnership with the Corporation for National and Community Service’s 
AmeriCorps VISTA program, the Department of Emergency Management (DEM) will scale up its community 
response and resilience planning to expand opportunities to address community vulnerabilities at the neigh-
borhood level. The City will place two VISTA members in DEM to increase capacity and support a two-way 
information channel between active community leaders and the City.

2. Utilizing the Social Vulnerability Index recently produced by the Resilience Office (see p.63), the City will 
collaborate with the network of preparedness groups to help residents map their own neighborhoods’ physical, 
social, and economic assets. By identifying key gathering places, as well as available resources and skills which 
may be helpful in an emergency situation, the City can work to ensure all communities have the necessary sup-
port to be prepared for future shocks. 

3. Neighbor-to-neighbor connections are especially important for residents who are most vulnerable to 
shocks and prolonged service disruptions, particularly isolated kūpuna and those with disabilities. The De-
partment of Community Services (DCS) will collaborate with neighborhood preparedness groups to identify 
vulnerable residents in their communities who may require additional assistance and resources. The City and 
neighborhood groups will expand practices including neighborhood-level volunteer checks on vulnerable neigh-
bors before and during hazardous events.

4. The City will work with philanthropic partners to create a dedicated, organized disaster fund struc-
ture that supports community preparedness groups and efficiently captures and distributes local and 
national donations in the wake of a large disaster. Funding and other technical support will increase 
response capacity and future resilience-building at the neighborhood level. 

1 0 4

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Emergency Management, DCS, DPR, 
HFD, HPD, Cross-Island Communities Resilience Network, 
HI-EMA, Hawai’i Community Foundation, CNCS

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge     UN SDG
 

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

INDUSTRY, INNOVATIVE
AND INFRATRUCTURE  

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

Performance Metrics
• Number of community preparedness groups 
   partnered with DEM
• Creation of organized disaster fund 

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Connected and engaged commu-
nities are among the best resilience 
tools the City can use to ensure 
O‘ahu not only bounces back, but 
bounces forward after a disaster. 
These actions work to build upon the 
strength of the existing network of 
volunteers and community groups 
to foster inclusive and integrated 
City preparedness planning with 
communities. An increased focus on 
vulnerable residents will help ensure 
equitable resilience during emer-
gencies.

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Torrential rainfall in April 2018 damaged approximately 150 homes throughout East Ho-
nolulu. Uncle Danny Tengan, chair of ‘Āina Haina Prepared, seen here in yellow, recruited 
175 volunteers to clear mud from 14 homes in Wailupe, Niu Valley, Kuli‘ou‘ou, and Hawai‘i 
Kai. Formed in 2014, the community preparedness group aims to make the well-estab-
lished area of roughly 1,200 households more prepared and self-reliant when facing local 
emergencies. ‘Āina Haina Prepared is one of at least 20 community preparedness groups 
that form the Cross-Island Community Preparedness Network. honolulu.gov/demvolun-
teer/communitypreparedness.html.

Photo by Rick Wagner

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 0 5

Pillar IV.  CO MMU N I T Y  COH ESI ON

u

G OAL  1 :  Empower Grassroots Resilience Champions 

Action    36

Increase City-Community Relationships 
through Volunteerism 

u The work of adapting and strengthening  O‘ahu’s communities will require many hands from 
across government, the for-profit, and nonprofit sectors. Our ability to cooperate across these sectors, 
and to draw upon the comparative advantages of each sector, will determine how successful we are at 
navigating future shocks and stresses to our island.

O‘ahu is home to nearly 5,300 nonprofit organizations (NPOs) that directly benefit our community by 
delivering essential social services, sustaining natural environments, and preserving cultural heritage. 
These services are invaluable to our community; they complement, supplement, and enhance the work 
of government, boost responsiveness to social needs, and reduce the cost of government. Furthermore, 
NPOs and volunteer organizations promote positive civic engagement and community building. 

In order to foster awareness and connectivity among the City and County of Honolulu’s 8,500+ staff 
members and the O‘ahu nonprofit community, advance positive community work, and ultimately create 
stronger collaboration between the City and nonprofits, the City will create a Volunteer Time Match 
Program for employees that wish to volunteer time for charitable work.  

Using a list of validated organizations whose missions enhance community connections to place and re-
silience, the City will match volunteer time by up to eight hours per year. Coordinated by the Department 
of Community Services (DCS), employees will use an internal website to search for volunteer opportuni-
ties within their own communities and log their volunteer hours via the City’s Lōkahi Console. 

Additionally, the City will assist organizations in need of volunteers to connect with its current service 
agreements, such as the Department of Parks and Recreation’s Adopt-a-Park program. The City will also 
call upon for-profit partners to offer their employees paid volunteer time in the community. 

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Collective action through vol-
unteerism not only brings commu-
nities together, but also strengthens 
the resilience of the places in which 
they live. This action will increase 
the City’s capacity to engage and 
partner with local community 
projects. By working hands-on with 
local communities, City employees 
will develop a deeper understanding 
of the people and the places they 
work to serve, and build relation-
ships and trust that are critical in 
times of challenge.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Community Services, DIT, DHR, DPR, 
NCO, Aloha United Way

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge    UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

PARTNERSHIPS 
FOR THE GOALS

Performance Metrics
• Number of participating City employees 
• Number of participating community organizations
• Number of documented service hours

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Community gathers at Pāhonu Pond, 
Waimānalo, to restore the loko i‘a wall 
Photo credit: Resilience Office

The National Citizen Survey™ 
Fiscal Year 2018 Honolulu Community Livability Report concluded that nearly all aspects of 
Community Engagement (social events, openness and acceptance, opportunities to participate 
in community matters and volunteers opportunities) were rated positively by a majority of re-
spondents. However, the Report also found ratings for various governance characteristics to be 
lower than other comparable jurisdictions. Respondents’ sentiments, real or perceived, reflect 
opportunities to bridge City government with the clear engagement opportunities that commu-
nity is participating in. 

1 0 6

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 0 7

Pillar IV.  CO MMU N I T Y  COH ESI ON

u

G OAL  1 :  Empower Grassroots Resilience Champions 

Action    37

Weave a Tighter Community 
With Neighborhood Gatherings

u Strong community connections  with our family, neighbors, and friends are a critical component 
of resilient neighborhoods and a thriving community. The more we get to know our neighbors, and the 
more connectivity we build, the better we are able to come together as one in the face of challenges. 
Knowing this, the City will expand opportunities for residents to meet, connect, and build upon the exist-
ing aloha that makes O‘ahu strong.

Using our natural public gathering spaces—our parks—the City will partner with grassroots leaders and 
other organizations to host block party-style events around the island to connect community members 
and build resilience. Community leaders will be supported in their efforts to gather residents in local 
parks to share food, talk story, and celebrate our culture, increasing our island’s connectivity and our 
ability to weather any storm. The events will also serve as a way for residents to learn about key City 
resilience resources. City Departments and other local community groups will participate, providing 
educational materials for how residents can prepare for emergencies, promote local business and agri-
culture, participate in our clean energy transformation and prepare for climate change stressors. These 
events will offer opportunities to celebrate the culture of each community, foster connections between 
neighbors, and reach out to communities who may be more vulnerable during times of shock and stress.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Connected communities are 
resilient communities. This 
action will build social cohesion 
and provide critical resources on 
emergency preparedness, including 
for the residents most vulnerable 
to shocks and stresses.  By engaging 
residents neighborhood by neigh-
borhood with fun and interactive 
events, the City will build stronger 
relationships and reinvigorate the 
way in which it connects to commu-
nities to build resilience. 

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and Resiliency, 
DEM, DPR, BWS, HFD, HPD, OED, MOCA, NCO, Kanu 
Hawai‘i, Blue Zones Project, Aloha United Way

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge     UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

PEACE, JUSTICE AND STRONG 
INSTITUTION

Performance Metrics
• Number of neighborhood events supported
• Number of attendees who sign up for City 
   engagement
• Number of community partners who attend

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Photo by Adam Greenfield

Streets For All is a coalition project to build community through block parties. The project 
supports residents to reclaim their streets as gathering places by helping people who have 
never before held a block party, stewarding them through the organizing process up to the 
big day itself. Neighbors work together to reach out to other residents, organize inclusive and 
productive meetings, design events, and file for permits. Organizing a block party can be a 
decisive moment to reaffirm and create new social bonds. This bond, or social resilience and 
human connection, is the most critical element for the Resilience Strategy.

1 0 8

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 0 9

Pillar IV.  CO MMU N I T Y  COH ESI ON

u

G OAL  1 :  Empower Grassroots Resilience Champions 

Action    38

Empower Neighborhoods to Co-Design 
Safe and Complete Streets 

u Tackling climate change and improving the quality of life across O‘ahu neighborhoods will require 
a shift in infrastructure. Streets that support sustainable communities through promoting physical 
activity, reducing vehicle emissions, increasing pedestrian and bicycle safety, and beautifying neigh-
borhoods are critical to making residents feel comfortable getting out of their cars to use alternative 
mobility. But it took years to build our current infrastructure and it will take many years to permanently 
re-design our streets for better transportation options. In the meantime, “tactical urbanism” is a method 
being used by cities around the globe that are temporarily re-designing streets with community input 
to better reflect the needs and values of those communities, open up possibilities for healthy modes of 
transportation, and show communities what increased connectivity can look like. 

In 2009, the State passed a law requiring all Counties and the State Department of Transportation (DOT) 
to adopt a Complete Streets policy. The City and County of Honolulu passed a Complete Streets poli-
cy (Ordinance 12-15) in 2012. In 2016, the City and County of Honolulu finalized its Complete Streets 
Design Manual and hired a Complete Streets Program Administrator to move toward implementation of 
improvements that make Honolulu’s streets and neighborhoods safe and inviting for users of all ages or 
abilities. The 2018 Age-Friendly Honolulu ordinance further strengthens the need for our streets to be 
“age-friendly.” Together, these laws and programs signal the City’s commitment to improving the safety, 
friendliness, and accessibility of our public infrastructure. 

Updating and transforming our streets for multi-mobility is often a slow process, however, and hasn’t 
always engaged the community members closest to the project. The City will develop a lighter, quicker, 
cheaper “pop-up” framework with opportunities for residents to identify dangerous streets or intersec-
tions and transform them through temporary streetscape projects such as new bike lanes, mini-parks, or 
artfully painted crosswalks. Supported by the City and driven by communities, these projects will make 
our streets more active, vibrant, and accessible for all, as well as expedite change and test new ideas that 
can one day become permanent.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
This action will facilitate com-
munity partnerships to enhance 
public spaces, improve safety, and 
encourage increased levels of walk-
ing and bicycling. With people out 
of their cars and actively engaged 
with the streets they use every 
day, we can reduce climate change 
emissions, support the economic 
vitality of local business, increase 
the quality of life for residents, and 
foster a greater sense of community.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Department of Transportation Services, DDC, DFM, DPP, 
DPR, HPD, OahuMPO, State DOT, Blue Zones Project, 
HMSA, Ulupono Initiative

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge       UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

INDUSTRY, INNOVATIVE
AND INFRATRUCTURE  

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

Performance Metrics
• Number of projects
• Number of volunteers engaged

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

The Complete Streets program in the Department of Transportation Services engages com-
munities, youth, and schools in “quick build” activities to 1) map common routes to access 
frequent destinations, 2) identify facility and safety issues and areas due to roadway design 
or human behaviors, and 3) envision and create improvements that could be implemented as 
interim measures and tested.

Photo credit: Department of Transportation Services

1 1 0

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 1 1

Pillar IV.  CO MMU N I T Y  COH ESI ON

u

G OAL  2:  Communicate and Affirm Island Values

Action    39

Celebrate O‘ahu’s Resilient Past 
and Future through Public Art 

u The history of O‘ahu reveals a culture of resilience and stories of sustainability that can serve as 
models for today. The power and wisdom of these stories risk being lost if they are not captured and shared, 
while new challenges like climate change are creating new stories of resilience that will define O‘ahu for 
generations to come. Stories connect us as island residents both to our past and to each other as we build 
our shared future. The City can help engage the creative power of the arts to inspire and involve residents in 
understanding our resilience challenges and visualizing our resilient future. 

The City will partner with local communities on public art initiatives that connect past, present, and future 
to tell the evolving story of  O‘ahu’s resilience. By bringing public statues to life in virtual reality, wrapping 
street-corner gray utility boxes in art and images, and creating shared neighborhood visions of a resilient future 
through murals on City facility walls, the City will help residents remember their past and visualize a preferred 
future. Designed to strengthen our community identity and cohesion, these public art initiatives will:

Learn from the Past: The City will leverage augmented reality technology and bring to life public statues 
throughout Honolulu to honor the people of Hawai‘i and recapture lost stories of resilience. This reimagin-
ing of public art will connect communities to a collection of important histories and instill native Hawaiian 
mo‘olelo into public spaces. By retelling these stories, we can learn from the past and remember what helps 
to make O‘ahu  strong—our people. 

Examine the Present: In order to build resilience in communities, we must first understand the challenges our 
communities face. Data on shocks and stresses, such as sea level rise, hurricanes, and greenhouse gas emissions, 
can be used to paint a picture of O‘ahu’s challenges and plant the seeds for solutions. Using information collected 
from city departments and scientific reports, the City will work with artists to visualize localized resilience data 
in compelling ways through art on neighborhood utility boxes, which has already brightened neighborhoods like 
Kaimukī. By making today’s resilience challenges visible on the streets we use every day, resilience solutions 
becomes more tangible and understandable.

Share Our Collective Future: Through vision meetings held in neighborhoods across the island, a team will 
listen to the stories of residents as they share what it means to live on O‘ahu today and envision images of a re-
silient future. Then, in collaboration with local artists, the City will work to transform those visions into murals 
unique to each community. Painted in prominent locations, these murals will serve as beacons of our common 
goals and hopes, as well as reminders of what can be accomplished when we come together as one.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
The action increases 
community-wide understanding 
of  O‘ahu’s resilience challenges and 
engages residents in visualizing 
solutions. By enhancing collective 
thinking and exploring creative 
ways to communicate resilience, 
the City will engage broader 
perspectives and foster a sense of 
community ownership over their 
own stories, generating a sense of 
belonging. These initiatives will 
not only beautify neighborhoods, 
but also allow communities to 
learn, share, and create as active 
participants in the story of O‘ahu’s 
resilience.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Mayor’s Office of Culture and the Arts, DPR, Resilience 
Office, NCO, Hawaiian Electric, Hawai‘i Community 
Foundation, HMSA

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge    UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

PEACE, JUSTICE AND STRONG 
INSTITUTION

Performance Metrics
•Number of art projects installed (statues 
  augmented, utility boxes painted, murals created)
•Number of community members engaged in the 
  creation process

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Honolulu has a strong, 
inclusive, and growing 
art scene. From annual 
programs such as POW! 
WOW! that continuously 
transform walls across 
Kaka‘ako, to the arts festi-
vals such as the Honolulu 
Biennial, to the painting 
of utility boxes in Kaimukī 
and planters in China-
town, to collaborations 
for murals decorating 
schools and other build-
ings and ground surfaces 
islandwide, even to the 
City’s invitation for an 
exterior work of art at the 
new Hau‘ula Fire Station, 
it is clear that we have 
stories to tell – stories of 
today, stories of the past, 
and stories for the future.

Caption: Hula dancers celebrate 
King Kamehameha III’s birthday at Thomas Square

Photo credit: Resilience Office

1 1 2

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 1 3

Pillar IV.  CO MMU N I T Y  COH ESI ON

u

G OAL  2:  Communicate and Affirm Island Values

Action    40

Lift Up Positive Examples of 
Island Values in Action 

u Successfully addressing the resilience challenges of the 21st century will require strong social 
capital, trust in one another as neighbors, and faith in our island institutions. With increasing political 
polarization, crime stories dominating the evening news, and the very real and concerning impacts around 
climate change, it is all too easy for O‘ahu residents to feel disconnected and disempowered. However, O‘ahu 
is also bursting with inspirational people, acts of selflessness, organizations who are making positive change, 
and innovative new projects and technology that will help humans and ecosystems survive and thrive in the 
future.  

The City will shine a light on stories of positivity and hope that provide inspiration and inspire action. 
The City will utilize its social media platforms to highlight instances of heroism, generosity, and public 
service on a regular basis, including stories of neighbors helping neighbors, shared values across Pacific 
Island cultures, and thriving local businesses. The Mayor will present a quarterly “Island Values Award” to 
a featured citizen and the City will encourage residents to submit nominations of people and their stories 
for the award. Additionally, the City will collaborate with other organizations who are promoting positive 
stories about Honolulu. For example, Blue Planet Foundation’s “We Are 100” campaign and the Hawai‘i 
Green Growth UN Local2030 Hub’s work on Hawai‘i’s Aloha+ Challenge both promote sustainability and 
climate stories of success. The Aloha+ Dashboard can serve as a participatory multi-media platform to uplift 
community, partner, and student stories, data, and bright spots from across O‘ahu and statewide, connecting 
Hawai‘i to the United Nations through the Sustainable Development Goals.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Not only will these stories help 
inspire and empower our residents; 
they will also provide concrete 
examples of actions and behav-
iors that amplify resilience.  The 
stories can be used in conjunction 
with the City’s Climate Messaging, 
Resilience Leadership Training, 
and other public education-related 
Resilience Actions.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Mayor’s Office of Communication, Resilience Office, 
MOCA, NCO, Hawai‘i Green Growth Local2030 Hub, Blue 
Planet Foundation, East-West Center

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge      UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

PEACE, JUSTICE AND STRONG 
INSTITUTION

Performance Metrics
• Number of community stories and nominations 
   submitted
• Amount of traction on social media for 
   featured stories

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Clean Water Heroes
Every other year, the City 
Department of Facility 
Maintenance Storm Water 
Quality Branch, Clean Wa-
ter Honolulu, selects recip-
ients for the Good Neigh-
bor and Environmental 
Hero Awards. Volunteer 
efforts by citizens, busi-
nesses, schools, communi-
ty groups and government 
agencies include creating 
awareness of storm water 
pollution and water quality 
issues in streams and the 
ocean and actively engag-
ing in best management 
practices to reduce pollut-
ants in stormwater runoff.

Photo credit: Department 
of Facility Maintenance

1 1 4

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 1 5

Pillar IV.  CO MMU N I T Y  COH ESI ON

u

G OAL  2:  Communicate and Affirm Island Values

Action    41

Launch a Place-Based Resilience 
Training Program for City Leadership

u Ensuring that City leadership understand O‘ahu’s unique cultural and environmental fabric—
especially in the context of a rapidly changing climate—is fundamental to creating a resilient future for 
our island community. City leaders are responsible for critical programs and administer resources needed 
to ensure resilient communities and protect island values and traditional rights, but many haven’t had for-
mal training or a career background that exposed them to the unique resilience challenges and Hawai‘i’s 
public trust and cultural laws. A short orientation to these trends and responsibilities will enable them to 
be more effective and informed in executing their roles. 

Building off of the success of the state’s Native Hawaiian rights training program, which was developed 
in collaboration with the Office of Hawaiian Affairs (OHA) and the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa, the 
City will partner with OHA and other agencies to design and implement a place-based, climate resilience 
training program for senior City and County leadership. Department heads, commissions, boards, and 
councils will be required to receive an overview of key parts of the State Constitution and City Charter, 
native Hawaiian rights and cultural practices, as well as Hawai‘i-specific climate change impacts and pro-
jections, which will affect our political and cultural structures in the coming years. This place-based, cli-
mate resilience training would equip current and future leaders with tools to understand O‘ahu’s unique 
sense of place and resilience challenges, while building the capacity of the city to address resilience for 
years to come. Once content is refined, an automated training and testing video can be created that could 
be more broadly distributed to all City employees via City intranet.

1 1 6

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
By instilling specific cultural  
and resilience knowledge in our 
City leaders, who have a hand 
in finding solutions to our city’s 
resilience challenges, we will in-
crease the City’s capacity to instill 
resilience across all of its depart-
ments. This training program will 
build the city’s resilience from the 
inside out by nurturing a robust 
local government that under-
stands potential future scenarios 
and is prepared to tackle the chal-
lenges that come its way.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and Resiliency, 
DHR, DIT, State OHA

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge     UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

SUSTAINABLE CITIES
AND COMMUNITIES

PEACE, JUSTICE AND STRONG 
INSTITUTION

Performance Metrics
• Completion of curriculum for training
• Percentage of City leaders who have completed 
   the training course
• Post-training survey responses demonstrating 
   knowledge gained

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

In 2015 the State of 
Hawai‘i passed a law 
(Act 169, Session Laws 
2015) requiring mem-
bers of certain local 
boards, commissions, 
and councils to receive 
“Training relating to 
native Hawaiian and 
Hawaiian traditional and 
customary rights, natu-
ral resources and access 
rights, and the public 
trust.” The training is ad-
ministered by the State Office of Hawaiian Affairs (OHA) and conducted by 
faculty members of the Ka Huli Ao Center for Excellence in Native Hawaiian 
Law at the William S. Richardson School of Law of the University of Hawai‘i. 
The trainings are held twice a year and supported by OHA. Through this law 
and past similar trainings, Ka Huli Ao has educated hundreds of state and 
county decision makers and staff members over the past six years.

Photo by Nate Yuen

A native yellow-faced bee rests on a pua 
‘ilima, the official flower of O‘ahu.

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 1 7

Pillar IV.  CO MMU N I T Y  COH ESI ON

u

G OAL  2:  Communicate and Affirm Island Values 

Action    42

Foster Shared Understanding of Climate Change 
Island-Wide Though an Outreach Campaign

u Communicating effectively about human activity that is driving climate change and the dire impacts 
is extremely important—but also immensely challenging. As an island community, we are on the front lines of 
the climate crisis and beginning to see impacts in the places we live and love on O‘ahu. The City has an import-
ant role in helping educate our residents about the scale of change we face, and understand the growing efforts 
that our City is undertaking to find solutions. In many cases, these critical solutions require up-front invest-
ment, behavioral shifts, and profound change to the status quo. But once implemented, the same solutions 
offer healthier neighborhoods, long-term cost savings, and a stronger and more self-sufficient economy.  

O‘ahu is starting from a place of strength. A strong majority of voters on O‘ahu supported action to mandate 
the creation of the Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and Resiliency, and a recent national survey shows 
that 82 percent of O‘ahu residents believe climate change is happening (12 percentage points higher than the 
national average). What’s more, 64 percent of O‘ahu residents believe local officials should do more about 
climate change and a majority of residents believe that climate change will hurt them personally in the future. 
Still, many O‘ahu residents do not clearly understand the magnitude and speed of the climate impacts coming 
our way,  what measures they should be taking as individuals and as families, and what policy initiatives are 
required to seriously address the climate crisis. 

In order for City efforts to be successful, we must be able to translate problems and solutions into everyday 
language that resonates with residents. Residents in turn must embrace the broad change we must make on 
our island and deeply understand the impacts to individuals and families if we fail to act.

The City will engage in a public awareness campaign to raise consciousness about climate and sustainability issues, 
engage a new Climate Advisor position to help accelerate communication and education in the key greenhouse gas 
emission areas of transportation and physical buildings, translate climate science and policy education material 
into effective local stories and messages, and produce video and other content to educate City employees and the 
broader public.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Effective climate messenging can 
foster swifter passage of climate-re-
lated policies. It will also create a 
better-informed, more coordinated 
body of leaders who can effectively 
communicate about climate change 
and resilience with their constituents. 
It will also help to educate residents 
about how climate change will impact 
them, suggest what roles they can 
take, and empower them to act. With 
clearer information, expectations, and 
guidance about what the future holds, 
the people of O‘ahu will have stronger 
psychological resilience as climate 
change unfolds.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Mayor’s Office of Communication, Resilience Office, Ha-
wai‘i News Now; Hawai‘i Green Growth Local2030 Hub, 
State DOE, University of Hawai‘i, East-West Center

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge      UN SDG

CLEAN ENERGY

CLIMATE ACTION

QUALITY EDUCATION

Performance Metrics
• Increased climate awareness for O‘ahu residents 
   in biennial Yale Climate Opinion Poll
• Increased civic participation in Climate Change 
   Commission proceedings
• Create and staff Climate Advisor position

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Community Engagement
The City participates in annual 
community-organized disaster pre-
paredness fairs across the island. 
Departments, including the Ho-
nolulu Fire Department, Honolulu 
Police Department, Department of 
Emergency Management, Board of 
Water Supply, and the Resilience 
Office, host informational tables 
where they engage with residents 
about how to prepare for hazards 
such as floods, fires, storms, tsuna-
mis, and earthquakes. The number 
of community participants are 
growing and in 2018, over 8,300 
residents attended nine prepared-
ness fairs across O‘ahu.

The Resilience Office at the Mala-
ma Ala Wai Community Fair

Photo credit: Resilience Office 

1 1 8

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 1 9

Pillar IV.  CO MMU N I T Y  COH ESI ON

u

G OAL  3:  Island-Wide Alignment 

Action    43

Ensure City Partnership in O‘ahu’s 
Collective Impact Resilience Efforts

u Resilience is going to take unprecedented collaboration. The City’s Resilience Strategy was 
created in large part by asking residents, community organizations, and the business community where 
they would recommend prioritizing City leadership and solutions. There is growing awareness across 
the island that the resilience challenges that lie ahead for O‘ahu are far too complex for any one player or 
sector to tackle alone. Our future requires coordinated, cross-sectorial, collaborative efforts that draw 
upon the strengths and expertise of multiple actors. There are several vehicles for the City to partner in 
meaningful, shared efforts including the Aloha+ Challenge, Thrive Hawai‘i, and the CHANGE frame-
work, among others. 

The City will work with organizations and communities across the island to align long-term strategic 
plans that collaboratively work toward goals set forth in the Resilience Strategy and other City plans.

As part of the rollout of Honolulu’s Resilience Strategy, the Office of Climate Change, Sustainability 
and Resiliency will educate local businesses and non-profits about the goals and actions of the Strategy, 
and work to align its actions with the long-term efforts of island-wide partners. This effort will begin 
with the organizations that served on the Resilience Steering Committee and Discovery Area Working 
Groups, and then broaden to include other organizations. When possible, these shared efforts should be 
organized around resilience objectives that local communities themselves have articulated a need for, 
co-designed, and seek assistance in implementing.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
Aligning the City’s resilience 
goals can foster swifter passage 
of climate-related policies. It will 
also create a better-informed, more 
coordinated body of leaders who 
can effectively communicate about 
climate change and resilience with 
their constituents. It will also help 
to educate residents about how 
climate change will impact them, 
suggest what roles they can take, 
and empower them to act. With 
clearer information, expectations, 
and guidance about what the future 
holds, the people of O‘ahu will have 
stronger psychological resilience as 
climate change unfolds.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Office of Climate Change, Sustainability and Resiliency, 
Hawaiian Electric, Hawai‘i Community Foundation, UH, 
Hawai‘i Green Growth Local2030 Hub

Timeframe 

Aloha+                   UN SDG
 

 

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

PARTNERSHIPS
FOR THE GOALS

PEACE, JUSTICE
& STRONG 
INSTITUTIONS

Performance Metrics
• Number of Resilience Steering Committee mem-
bers that agree to implement one or more Resil-
ience Actions in partnership with the City

• Number of collaborative resilience projects initiat-
ed with the City and at least one external partner

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Hawai‘i Executive Conference and Ha-
wai‘i Community Foundation Change 
Framework

The CHANGE Framework is a platform to 
encourage collaborative conversations, 
engagement, and a will to act to address 
our community’s most critical challenges. 

The CHANGE Framework is focused 
on providing:

• Unbiased data and research to inform how 
communities are performing across the state
• Analysis to identify gaps and opportunities 
within each area and geography
• Opportunities to create shared goals and 
partnerships to amplify impact

On the CHANGE website, you can click on 
each letter below to take a deeper dive into 
the data surrounding the areas of CHANGE. 
hawaiicommunityfoundation.org/change

1 2 0

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 2 1

Pillar IV.  CO MMU N I T Y  COH ESI ON

u

G OAL  3:  Island-Wide Alignment 

Action    44

Create a City-Community Liaison to Leverage 
Non-Profit and Volunteer Assets

u The City must work seamlessly with residents and community groups who want to build resil-
ience. O‘ahu is home to nearly 5,300 nonprofit organizations (NPOs) that directly benefit our commu-
nity by delivering essential social services, sustaining natural environments, and preserving cultural 
heritage. These services are invaluable to our community; they complement, supplement, and enhance 
the work of government, boost responsiveness to social needs, and reduce costs that would otherwise be 
borne by the City. NPOs and citizen volunteers also build social fabric, civic engagement and community 
capital. 

Increasing resilience challenges will require coordinated effort between government, businesses, NPOs, 
and active volunteers and neighborhoods across the island. While the City currently provides a range of 
grant programs in support of the nonprofit sector and often hires the services of nonprofits, there are still 
many challenges with this partnership. It is often difficult for NPOs to navigate the City’s regulatory and 
bureaucratic labyrinth in order to submit necessary paperwork, apply for contracts or grants, or to iden-
tify the right departmental contacts. It is important that the City reduce barriers to partnership, align 
department efforts with nonprofit efforts that improve City services, and be transparent and responsive 
when NPOs and volunteers want to provide assistance to the City—especially when there are legitimate 
and even legal reasons that prevent the City from partnering.

The City will create a new Community Liaison Office to break down silos and reach across Departments 
to ensure efficiency and identify shared needs as well as successful models and coordinate consistent 
responses and documents/requirements for community partners. Housed in the Managing Director’s 
Office, the Community Liaison will be able to serve as a primary point of contact at the City for NPOs 
and volunteers to offer services, navigate City departments and processes, address liability issues, access 
City resources, and submit ideas for the improvement and efficiency of City operations that leverage 
community partnerships. The Office will lower barriers and reduce challenges felt within departments 
and in the community to help foster collaborative success and reduce redundancy and expenses.

Resilience 
Co-Benefits 
This action will improve O‘ahu 
nonprofits’ ability to deliver 
social, cultural, and resilience 
services in coordination with the 
City. Land conservation, coastal 
debris clean-up, park stewardship, 
disaster preparedness, urban 
tree planting, and many other 
City-nonprofit partnerships could 
improve efficiency and impact. 
This action will also work to 
increase economic diversification, 
opening up more opportunities for 
job creation and increased eco-
nomic wellbeing for residents.

Lead & Implementing Partner(s)
 
Managing Director’s Office, DCS, DPR, OED, Hawai‘i 
Community Foundation

Timeframe 

Aloha+ Challenge     UN SDG

SMART SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES

PARTNERSHIPS
FOR THE GOALS

DECENT WORK AND 
ECONOMIC GROWTH

Performance Metrics
• Create Community Liaison position
• Number of projects and programs supported 
   and/or improved by the Liaison position

T
H
G

I
L
T
O
P
S

Liaising for Food
In the same vein as this action, the 
City’s Agricultural Liaison within the 
Office of Economic Development 
(OED) enables the City to capitalize 
on agricultural funding opportunities 
provided by state and federal agen-
cies, collaborate with the state on 
issues of mutual concern, work with 
City departments on changes that 
will benefit agriculture, and focus on 
a reasoned approach to preservation 
and use of agricultural lands. OED’s 
Agricultural Program emphasizes: 
supporting “buy” locally-produce 
fresh agricultural products; promot-
ing development of value-added 
agricultural products; promoting 
exports of fresh fruits or vegetables; 
training of new or existing farmers 

Bulb onions grow in Kunia
Photo credit: Office of Economic Development

with farming experience to improve their farm-
ing practices; and supporting farmers or ranch-
ers to develop soil and water conservation 
plans to better manage their on-farm resource.

1 2 2

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 2 3

 Implementation

Implementation   

Implementing 
Resilience for O‘ahu
Producing a strategy is not the 
end of thinking about resilience 
–it’s the beginning. 
u  The process of developing this Resilience Strategy involved several 
thousand community members and hundreds of government, business, 
academic, and nonprofit leaders who deeply care for our island community. 
It is clear that there is a growing sense of urgency around resilience issues 
and a recognition that action needs to begin immediately. In response, the 
working groups endorsed a range of actions from relatively simple and 
immediate tasks to long-term systemic actions that require more time and 
investment. 

Our journey to resilience 
is similar to a long-distance 
canoe race. We need to come 
off the starting line quickly to 
get our community in strategic 
position, but we also need to 
shift our attention to the long 
haul—steering and tweaking 
our fundamental long-range 
systems to ensure we make it 
safely to shore. This Resilience 
Strategy lays out 44 discrete 
Resilience Actions that offer 
both immediate changes and 
long-term concepts that will 
help us paddle in synchroni-
zation. Each of them, however, 
will require a unique combi-
nation of cross-sector collab-
oration, political will, a focus 
on community benefit over 
individual gain, and—most 
crucially—financial resources.   

Implementation 
Timeframe for 
Actions

7

3

Our portfolio of 
resilience ac-
tions span from 
quick tweaks 
to long-range 
system change 
goals. Far from 
a wish list, this is 
a thoughtful and 
balanced strat-
egy of how to 
take action.

20

14

Immediate (0-1 yrs)

Mid-term (2-5 yrs)

Short-term (1-2 yrs)

Long-term (5+ yrs)

The single greatest implementation tool the City pos-
sesses is our operating and capital budget. It is often 
said, “show me your budget and I’ll tell you what you 
value.” As we face the critical resilience challenges of 
the 21st century, it is important that the allocation of fi-
nancial resources, through our budget process, reflects 
the values of not only the Resilience Strategy, but also 

other critical resilience planning documents such as 
the Development and Sustainable Communities Plans, 
Functional Plans, Hazard Mitigation Plan, and others. 
Going forward, our City must ensure that projects 
advance multiple benefits and are also designed to last 
in the face of rapid change.

The Key 
Components 
for Action:

New 
Policies

Budget 
Alignment

Resilient 
Projects

City-Community 

Partnerships

1 2 4

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y     «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 2 5

 Implementation

Implementation   

As part of our commitment to implementation of the Resilience Strategy, the City’s Managing Director 
and Budget and Fiscal Services Department reviewed new tools and mechanisms from other cities to help 
align our City resources with long-term resilience goals.
 
geting processes, including:

The City will continue to evaluate and explore several best practices for integration into Honolulu’s bud-

•  Implementing an infrastructure project review process similar to the City of New Orleans’ Resilience 
Design Review Committee, which ensures that projects over a certain size incorporate resilience elements 
up front and provide multiple benefits and durability for the long term.  

•  Issuing a longer-term 10-year Capital and 5-year Financial Plan similar to the City and County of San 
Francisco, which allows for more comprehensive approaches to complex resilience problems and ensures 
that departments can advance large initiatives in a predictable way.

•  Creating and communicating a Capital Project Map similar to the City and County of San Francisco 

that will provide additional transparency and government confidence to the public and community groups. 

•  Closely aligning the City’s Multi-Hazard Pre-Disaster Mitigation Plan to the Capital Plan as done in 

the City of New Orleans, which leverages federal funds for local projects and makes sure that every project 
advances disaster preparedness whenever possible.

•  Implementing a “Green Procurement Code” as done in King County, Washington which ensures that the 

full costs are factored in up front and the City is able to appropriately value resilience and sustainability 
elements to achieve long-range goals. 

•  Creating a bulk fund for integrated planning and design of climate adaptation and resilience infrastruc-
ture projects requiring multi-department collaboration as advised by the City’s Planning and Engineering 
Sub-Cabinet leadership.

•  Creating a Green Revolving Fund for the City to capture energy savings and re-invest in additional en-
ergy and efficiency projects similar to the University of Hawai‘i, which ensures that projects that result in 
cost savings accelerate and advance additional work across City facilities.

The process of creating this Resilience Strategy revealed numerous opportunities for the City to 
learn. Implementing the Strategy offers multiple ways for the City to make change and pivot toward a resil-
ient future. The “Resilience Dividend” is a concept describing the economic benefit of making investment 
decisions with an eye on a rapidly changing environment, ensuring that necessary expenditures produce 
co-benefits, and incorporating flexibility. The result will not only yield financial return, but social benefits 
and increased community buy-in are to gain, as well. 
 
As the City and County of Honolulu innovates and implements the forty-four discrete projects and pol-
icies contained in this Strategy, we must also evaluate our larger systems like budgeting and procurement 
to align and support our island’s primary resilience goals: to reduce long-term costs borne by residents and 
to build climate resilience in the face of increased natural disasters. If we are successful doing both—syn-
chronize our short-term paddling and our long-term steering—we will safely make it to a more resilient and 
secure shore for our island population.

Photo credit: Sean Marrs

u  To embrace the challenge of climate resilience, Mayor Caldwell already took the first step in July 2018 
when he issued Directive 18-2 (Directive): “To address Climate Change and Sea Level Rise.” The Directive 
requires all City departments and agencies to incorporate climate change and sea level rise in plans, programs, 
and capital improvement decisions. Evaluating risk and resilience in the budgeting process doesn’t just make 
sense for today, it lays the groundwork for financial strength into the decades ahead. The City has already re-
ceived inquiries from municipal bond rating agencies on our awareness and actions regarding climate risk, and 
these agencies have signaled that our actions will be an important factor going forward as we look to protect our 
bond rating. Resilience is truly where the environment and economy meet.

1 2 6

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 2 7

Actions
Summary

Aloha+ Challenge 
and UN SDGs

He Nohona ‘Ae‘oia, A Culture of Sustainability 
Signed on by the Chief Executives of the State and Counties in 2014, 
the Aloha+ Challenge is a statewide public-private stakeholder initiative 
that identifies locally and culturally appropriate and relevant goals, metrics 
and indicators that track Hawai‘i’s progress toward achieving the global 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

The Aloha+ Challenge was inspired by island leadership 
commitments, and builds on a legacy of community initia-
tives including Hawai‘i 2000, Mālama Hawai‘i, and Hawai‘i 
2050 to support collective action. Progress on Hawai‘i’s 
sustainability goals is measured on the Aloha+ Challenge 
Dashboard, dashboard.hawaii.gov/aloha-challenge.
 
The Aloha+ Challenge has six sustainability 
targets for 2030.

United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals 
Adopted in 2015 by all United Nations Members 
States the SDGs set the 2030 Agenda for Sus-
tainable Development. Hawai‘i Green Growth 
serves as a United Nations Local2030Hub facil-
itating the collaboration to advance the Aloha+ 
Challenge goals, open data, joint strategies and 
solutions, educational pathways for tomorrow’s 
leaders, and scalable island models to achieve the 
UN SDGs. The 17 SDGs are as follows.  

1 2 8

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y     «

Photo by Rich Downs

Photo credit: Rich Downs

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 2 9

 Actions Summary

Actions Summary   

Pillar I. / REMAINING ROOTED 
Ensuring an Affordable Future for Our Island

Goal 1: Supporting Affordable Housing Development

Action #

Action Name

Lead

Timeframe

Pillar II. / BOUNCING FORWARD 
Fostering Resilience in the Face of Natural Disasters

Goal 1: Pre-Disaster Preparation 

 

 

 

 

Aligned Aloha+
Challenge Goal

Primary Aligned 
UN Sustainable 
Development Goal

Secondary Aligned 
UN Sustainable 
Development Goal

Action #

Action Name

Lead

Timeframe

Aligned Aloha+
Challenge Goal

Primary Aligned 
UN Sustainable 
Development Goal

Secondary Aligned 
UN Sustainable 
Development Goal

1

2

3

4

5

Reduce Empty Homes and 
Increase Affordable Housing 
Funding

Return Illegal Vacation 
Rental Units to Local 
Housing

Develop Alternative, 
Affordable Housing Options 
for O’ahu Residents

Expand Affordable Housing 
Funding by Implementing 
Progressive Property Taxes

Implement a Guaranteed 
Security Program to 
Support Local Home 
Ownership

HOU

Mid-term

DPP

Immediate

DPP

Short-term

BFS

Mid-term

CSD

Mid-term

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 10 - Reduced 
Inequalities

SDG 1 - No Poverty

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 9 - Industry, 
Innovation and 
Infrastructure

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 10 - Reduced 
Inequalities

SDG 1 - No Poverty

Goal 2: Reducing Additional Cost Burdens

6

7

8

Expand Housing and 
Energy Transformation 
by Accelerating the 
Permitting Process

Reduce Utility Costs 
for Residents through 
Transparency and 
Disclosure

Increase Housing 
Affordability by Reducing 
Parking Requirements

DPP

Mid-term

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 9 - Industry, 
Innovation and 
Infrastructure

CCSR

Mid-term

Clean Energy

SDG 7 - Affordable 
and Clean Energy

SDG 10 - Reduced 
Inequalities

DPP

Mid-term

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 9 - Industry, 
Innovation and 
Infrastructure

11

12

13

14

Launch Residential 
Hurricane Retrofit Program 
to Strengthen Properties 
Vulnerable to Hurricanes

Increase Flood Insurance 
Affordability for O‘ahu 
Residents 

Establish Future Conditions 
Climate Resilience Design 
Guidelines

Protect Lives and Property 
by Updating Building Codes

DPP

Short-term

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

CCSR

Short-term

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

SDG 9 – Industry, 
Innovation and 
Infrastructure

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 10 - Reduced 
Inequalities

CCSR

Short-term

DDC

Mid-term

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 15 - Life on Land

SDG 9 - Industry, 
Innovation and 
Infrastructure

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

Goal 2: Effective Disaster Response 

 

 

 

 

15

16

17

18

Develop a Network of 
Community Resilience 
Hubs

Establish an O‘ahu 
Emergency Food Supply 
and Storage Strategy

Ensure Access to Fuel 
Supplies to Aid Disaster
Response and Recovery

Increase O‘ahu’s 
Preparedness Utilizing 
Scenario Modeling and 
Artificial Intelligence

DEM

Mid-term

DEM

Short-term

DEM

Mid-term

DEM

Short-term

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

SDG 9 – Industry, 
Innovation and 
Infrastructure

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 10 - Reduced 
Inequalities

SDG 15 - Life on Land

SDG 9 - Industry, 
Innovation and 
Infrastructure

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

Goal 3: Improving Economic Opportunity

Goal 3: Successful Disaster Recovery 

 

 

 

 

9

10

Foster an Innovation 
Economy through the 
City’s Office of Economic 
Development

Promote New Agricultural 
Models for Economic and 
Food Security

OED

Mid-term

Green Workforce & 
Education

SDG 8 - Decent Work 
and Economic Growth

OED

Mid-term

Local Food

SDG 2 - Zero Hunger

SDG 9 - Industry, 
Innovation and 
Infrastructure

SDG 8 - Decent Work 
and Economic Growth

19

Develop and Implement 
a Long-Term Disaster 
Recovery Plan for O‘ahu

CCSR

Short-term

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 16 - Peace, 
Justice and Strong 
Institutions

1 3 0

1 3 1

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.org Actions Summary

Actions Summary   

Goal 3: Climate Resilient Future (continued) 

 

 

 

31

32

33

34

Establish a Storm Water 
Enterprise Fund to 
Better Finance Water 
Management

Deploy Sustainable Roof 
Systems to Manage Urban 
Heat and Rainfall

Keep O‘ahu Cool by 
Maintaining and Enhancing 
the Community Forest

Minimize Economic and 
Property Risk within the Ala 
Wai Canal Watershed

DFM

Short-term

Natural Resource 
Management

SDG 9 - Industry, 
Innovation and 
Infrastructure

SDG 6 - Clean Water 
and Sanitation

DPP

Short-term

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

SDG 9 - Industry, 
Innovation and 
Infrastructure

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

DPR

Long-Term

Natural Resource 
Management

SDG 15 - Life on Land

SDG 13 - Climate 
Action

DDC

Immediate

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

SDG 9 - Industry, 
Innovation and 
Infrastructure

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

Pillar III. / CLIMATE SECURITY 
Tackling Climate Change by Reducing Emissions and Adapting to Impacts

Goal 1: Clean Energy Economy 

 

 

 

 

Action #

Action Name

Lead

Timeframe

Aligned Aloha+
Challenge Goal

Primary Aligned 
UN Sustainable 
Development Goal

Secondary Aligned 
UN Sustainable 
Development Goal

20

21

22

23

Reduce Taxpayer Expense 
and Increase Renewable 
Energy through a City-
Wide Energy Performance 
Contract

Establish an Energy 
Benchmarking Standard 
for O‘ahu Commercial 
Buildings

District Cooling: Tap the 
Ocean to Cool Our Buildings

Expand Opportunities 
for Methane Capture and 
Re-Use

DDC

Short-term

Clean Energy

SDG 13 - Climate 
Action

SDG 7 - Affordable 
and Clean Energy

CCSR

Short-term

Clean Energy

SDG 9 – Industry, 
Innovation and 
Infrastructure

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

DFM

Short-term

Clean Energy

ENV

Mid-term

Waste Reduction

SDG 7 - Affordable 
and Clean Energy

SDG 13 - Climate 
Action

SDG 12 - Responsible 
Consumption & 

SDG 7 - Affordable 
and Clean Energy

Goal 2: Clean Ground Transportation 

 

 

 

 

24

25

26

27

Expand Electric Vehicle 
Charging Infrastructure 
Island-Wide

Accelerate Carbon-Free 
New Mobility Options

Ensure Equal Access to 
Sustainable Transportation 
Options and Cost Savings

Transform the City’s Public 
Fleet to 100% Renewable 
Fuel by 2035

CCSR

Immediate

Clean Energy

DTS

Long-term

Clean Energy

BFS

Immediate

Clean Energy

DTS

Long-term

Clean Energy

SDG 13 - Climate 
Action

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 9 - Industry, 
Innovation and 
Infrastructure

SDG 13 - Climate 
Action

SDG 13 - Climate 
Action

SDG 10 - Reduced 
Inequalities

SDG 13 - Climate 
Action

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

Goal 3: Climate Resilient Future 

 

 

 

 

28

29

30

Chart a Climate Resilient 
Future by Creating and 
Implementing a Climate 
Adaptation Strategy
 
Protect Beaches and 
Public Safety with Revised 
Shoreline Management 
Rules

Protect Coastal Property 
and Beaches Through 
Innovation and Partnerships

CCSR

Short-term

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

SDG 13 - Climate 
Action

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

DPP

Short-term

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 14 - Life Below 
Water

DPP

Short-term

Natural Resource 
Management

SDG 14 - Life Below 
Water

SDG 17 - Partnerships 
for the Goals

1 3 2

1 3 3

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.orgReferences

 Actions Summary

Pillar IV. / COMMUNITY COHESION 
Leveraging the Strength and Leadership of Local Communities

Goal 1: Empower Grassroots Resilience Champions 

 

 

Action #

Action Name

Lead

Timeframe

Aligned Aloha+
Challenge Goal

Primary Aligned 
UN Sustainable 
Development Goal

Secondary Aligned 
UN Sustainable 
Development Goal

35

36

37

38

Increase Coordination with 
Neighborhood Emergency 
Preparedness Groups

Increase City-Community 
Relationships through 
Volunteerism

Weave a Tighter 
Community With 
Neighborhood Gatherings

Empower Neighborhoods 
to Co-Design Safe and 
Complete Streets

DEM

Immediate

CSD

Short-term

CCSR

Immediate

DTS

Immediate

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 10 - Reduced 
Inequalities

SDG 17 - Partnerships 
for the Goals

SDG 16 - Peace, 
Justice and Strong 
Institutions

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 9 - Industry, 
Innovation and 
Infrastructure

Goal 2: Communicate and Affirm Island Values  

 

 

39

40

41

42

Celebrate O‘ahu’s Resilient 
Past and Future through 
Public Art

Lift Up Positive Examples 
of Island Values in Action

Launch a Place-Based 
Resilience Training Program 
for City Leadership

Foster Shared 
Understanding of Climate 
Change Island-Wide 
Through an Outreach 
Campaign

MOCA

Short-term

MAY

Short-term

CCSR

Immediate

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

CCSR

Short-term

Clean Energy

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 16 - Peace, 
Justice and Strong 
Institutions

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 16 - Peace, 
Justice and Strong 
Institutions

SDG 16 – Peace, 
Justice and Strong 
Institutions

SDG 11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities

SDG 13 - Climate 
Action

SDG 4 - Quality 
Education

Goal 3: Island-Wide Alignment 

 

 

 

 

43

44

Ensure City Partnership in 
O‘ahu’s Collective Impact 
Resilience Efforts

Create a City-Community 
Liasons to Leverage Non-
Profit and Volunteer Assets

CCSR

Mid-term

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

SDG 17 - Partnerships 
for the Goals

SDG 16 - Peace, 
Justice and Strong 
Institutions

MDO

Mid-term

Smart Sustainable 
Communities

SDG 17 - Partnerships 
for the Goals

SDG 8 - Decent Work 
and Economic Growth

1 3 4

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

Photo credit: 
Katie Ersbak, State DLNR

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 3 5

 References

References   

O‘ahu: Resilience Context
ALICE. Who is ALICE? With the cost of living higher 
than what most people earn, ALICE families – an acro-
nym for Asset Limited, Income Constrained, Employed 
– have income above the Federal Poverty Level (FPL), 
but not high enough to afford a basic household budget 
that includes housing, child care, food, transportation, 
and health care. ALICE households live in every county 
in Hawai‘i – urban, suburban, and rural – and they 
include women and men, young and old, of all races and 
ethnicities. https://www.auw.org/alice

Strategy Actions

Pillar I. Remaining Rooted

AP News, “Hawaii’s population decline could affect 
the economy,” December 23, 2018. https://apnews.
com/36db89bd379d4f048932c4c33ad4939c. 
  
Thomas C. Frohlich, 24/7 Wall St., “What It Actually 
Costs to Live in America’s Most Expensive Cities,” 
September 7, 2018. https://247wallst.com/special-re-
port/2018/09/07/what-it-actually-costs-to-live-in-
americas-most-expensive-cities/.  
24/7 Wall St reviewed monthly living expenses from 
the Economic Policy Institute’s family budget calcu-
lator in the most expensive metro areas based on the 
Bureau of Economic Analysis’ regional price parities. 

PayScale. “Cost of Living in Honolulu, Hawaii.” www.
payscale.com/cost-of-living-calculator/Hawaii-Hono-
lulu

HNN Staff, Hawaii News Now, “HUD: $93,000 now 
considered ‘low income’ on Oahu,” June 2018, 2018. 
http://www.hawaiinewsnow.com/2018/09/20/hud-
now-considered-low-income-oahu/ 

Aloha United Way. 2017. ALICE: A Study of Financial 
Hardship in Hawai’i. ALICE is an acronym for Asset 
Limited, Income Constrained, Employed. https://
www.auw.org/alice
https://www.kitv.com/story/35822780/oahu-single-
family-home-prices-vault-to-all-time-high 

Ben Gutierrez, Hawaii News Now, “Report: Every 
zip code on Oahu is pricing out the average renter,” 
June 9, 2017. http://www.hawaiinewsnow.com/sto-
ry/35625897/new-report-looks-at-hawaii-rent-costs-
by-zip-code/

State Department of Business, Economic Develop-
ment & Tourism Office of Planning. July 2018. Afford-
able Rental Housing Report and Ten-Year Plan. http://
files.hawaii.gov/dbedt/op/spb/AffordableRentalHous-
ingReport_10YearPlan.pdf

Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Jus-
tice. 2018. Priced Out of Paradise. https://hiappleseed.
org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/Report_Priced-Out-
of-Paradise_Pages.pdf

Sumner La Croix, Adele Balderston, Atsushi Shiba-
ta, and Victoria Ward, Economic Research Organi-
zation at the University of Hawai‘i. January 2016. 
New Perspectives on Land and Housing Markets in 
Hawaii: Implications for Industrial and Commercial 
Land Leasing. http://uhero.hawaii.edu/assets/LaC-
roix-Land_Housing.1.27.pdf

Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law & Economic 
Justice, “Honolulu’s proposal to regulate short-term 
rentals needs serious help,” September 17, 2018. 
https://hiappleseed.org/2018/09/honolulus-propos-
al-to-regulate-short-term-rentals-needs-serious-help/ 

Stewart Yerton, Honolulu Civil Beat, “Addicted to 
Airbnb: Hawaii’s Tourism Economy Depends on 
Illegal Vacation Rentals,” January 2, 2019. https://
www.civilbeat.org/2019/01/addicted-to-airbnb-ha-
waiis-tourism-economy-depends-on-illegal-vaca-
tion-rentals/ 

City and County of Honolulu Mayor Kirk Caldwell, State 
of the City 2017. http://www.honolulu.gov/cms-may-
menu/site-may-sitearticles/792-site-may-featured-
cat/26670-state-of-the-city-2017.html
According to the 2018 Point-in-Time Count, overall 
homelessness declined 9.4% in 2018 and the number 
of chronically homeless persons successfully sheltered 
increased by 27.1%. http://www.honolulu.gov/rep/site/
ohou/PIT2018-TPoints.pdf. 4,620 homeless clients were 
also moved into permanent housing in 2018, in line with 
City goals. http://www.honolulu.gov/dashboard

Action 1 | Reduce Empty Homes and Increase 
Affordable Housing Funding 

U.S. Census, American Community Survey, Septem-
ber 2016. https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/
acs/ 
Aloha United Way. 2017. ALICE: A Study of Financial 

Hardship in Hawai’i. ALICE is an acronym for Asset 
Limited, Income Constrained, Employed. https://
www.auw.org/alice
 
SMS, Inc. for HHFDC. 2016. Hawai’i Housing Plan-
ning Study, 2016, Page 3, Table 1. https://dbedt.hawaii.
gov/hhfdc/files/2016/12/State_HHPS2016_Re-
port_111416-FINAL-122216.pdf

Rick Daysog, Hawaii News Now, “Amid Already Hot 
Housing Market, Foreign Investment in Hawaii Prop-
erty Sours,” December 12, 2018. http://www.hawaiin-
ewsnow.com/2018/12/26/foreign-investment-ha-
waii-soars/ 

The approximately 10,000 rental units and $60m 
collected via a Vacancy Fee are Resilience Office esti-
mates. These estimates are based on figures obtained 
from the State Department of Business, Economic 
Development & Tourism-commissioned “Hawai’i 
Housing Planning Study, 2016,” 2017

Vancouver Courier staff, Business Vancouver, “City 
of Vancourver says fewer homes declared vacat since 
tax imposed,” February 6, 2019. https://biv.com/ar-
ticle/2019/02/city-vancouver-says-fewer-homes-de-
clared-vacant-tax-imposed

Action 2 | Return Illegal Vacation Rental Units 
to Local Housing

SMS, Inc. for State of Hawaii Housing Finance & 
Development Corportation. 2016. Hawai‘i Housing 
Planning Study, 2016. https://dbedt.hawaii.gov/hhfdc/
files/2016/12/State_HHPS2016_Report_111416-FI-
NAL-122216.pdf

Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Jus-
tice, “Honolulu’s proposal to regulate short-term rent-
als needs serious help,” September 17, 2018. https://
hiappleseed.org/2018/09/honolulus-proposal-to-regu-
late-short-term-rentals-needs-serious-help/ 
Stewart Yerton, Honolulu Civil Beat, “Addicted to 
Airbnb: Hawaii’s Tourism Economy Depends on 
Illegal Vacation Rentals,” January 2, 2019. https://
www.civilbeat.org/2019/01/addicted-to-airbnb-ha-
waiis-tourism-economy-depends-on-illegal-vaca-
tion-rentals/ 

tice. 2018. Priced Out of Paradise. https://hiappleseed.
org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/Report_Priced-Out-
of-Paradise_Pages.pdf 

City and County of Honolulu Department of Planning 
and Permitting, “News,” October 25, 2018, and July 
31, 2018. www.honoluludpp.org

Henly-Shepard, Sarah. 2011. Hanalei Community Re-
silience Research & Planning Project, Preliminary Re-
port of Findings. http://hazards-climate-environment.
org/yahoo_site_admin/assets/docs/HanaleiPrelimRe-
portGovtSector_June232011.211154410.pdf

Action 3 | Develop Alternative, Affordable 
Housing Options for O‘ahu Residents

Aloha United Way. 2017. ALICE: A Study of Financial 
Hardship in Hawai’i. ALICE is an acronym for Asset 
Limited, Income Constrained, Employed. https://
www.auw.org/alice
Pu‘uhonua O Wai‘anae. https://www.alohaliveshere.
org/about 

Action 4 | Expand Affordable Housing Funding 
by Implementing Progressive Property Taxes 

Jared Walczak, Tax Foundation, “How High Are Prop-
erty Taxes in Your State?” August 13, 2015. https://
taxfoundation.org/how-high-are-property-taxes-
your-state 

State of Hawaii Housing Finance & Development Cor-
poration Rental Housing Revolving Fund, “The Rental 
Housing Revolving Fund (RHRF) provides ‘Equity 
Gap’ low-interest loans to qualified owners and devel-
opers constructing affordable housing units.” http://
dbedt.hawaii.gov/hhfdc/developers/rhtf_html/ 

Lee, M. 2016. Getting Serious About Affordable Hous-
ing: Towards a Plan for Metro Vancouver. Canadian 
Centre for Policy Alternatives. https://www.policyal-
ternatives.ca/sites/default/files/uploads/publications/
BC%20Office/2016/05/CCPA-BC-Affordable-Housing.
pdf 

Action 5 | Implement a Guaranteed Security 
Program to Support Local Home Ownership

Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law & Economic Jus-

City and County of Honolulu Department of Com-

1 3 6

1 3 7

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.org References

References   

munity Services, Down Payment Loans. https://
www.honolulu.gov/cms-dcs-menu/site-dcs-sitearti-
cles/1853-cad-loans-downpayment.html

Action 6 | Lower Energy and Housing Costs by 
Accelerating the Permitting Process 

City and County of Honolulu Department of Planning 
and Permitting, “Online Services and Resources.” http://
www.honoluludpp.org/OnlineServices.aspx

Action 7 | Reduce Utility Costs for Residents 
through Transparency and Disclosure

Hawaiian Electric, “Average Price of Electricity.” 
https://www.hawaiianelectric.com/billing-and-pay-
ment/rates-and-regulations/average-price-of-electricity 

U.S. Energy Information Administration, Elec-
tric Power Monthly with Data for November 2018, 
Table 5.6.A “Average Price of Electricity to Ultimate 
Customers by End-Use Sector.” https://www.eia.gov/
electricity/monthly/epm_table_grapher.php?t=ep-
mt_5_6_a 

U.S. Energy Information Administration, “2017 Aver-
age Monthly Bill- Residential.” https://www.eia.gov/
electricity/sales_revenue_price/pdf/table5_a.pdf 

Hawai‘i Revised Statues, Section 508D-10.5, Manda-
tory Seller Disclosures in Real Estate Transactions, 
Energy-efficiency consumer information in sale or 
lease of real property. https://www.capitol.hawaii.
gov/hrscurrent/Vol12_Ch0501-0588/HRS0508D/
HRS_0508D-0010_0005.htm 

Action 8 | Increase Housing Affordability by 
Reducing Parking Requirements

Matt Kain, Honolulu Magazine, February 2013, 
“Why Is Honolulu Parking so Expensive?” http://
www.honolulumagazine.com/Honolulu-Magazine/
February-2013/Parking-in-Paradise/Why-Is-Honolu-
lu-Parking-so-Expensive/

Action 9 | Foster an Innovation Economy 
through the City’s Office of Economic 
Development

State Department of Business, Economic Develop-

ment & Tourism, Quarterly Statistical & Economic 
Report, Outlook for the Economy, “4th Quarter 2018 
Report.” http://dbedt.hawaii.gov/economic/qser/out-
look-economy/ 

RAND Corporation in cooperation with Hawai‘i Insti-
tute of Public Affairs and The Chamber of Commerce 
of Hawaii, for the Office of the Secretary of Defense. 
2017. How Much Does Military Spending Add to Ha-
waii’s Economy? https://www.rand.org/content/dam/
rand/pubs/technical_reports/2011/RAND_TR996.pdf

World Travel & Tourism Council, Medium, “What 
happens when an island is dependent on Tourism?” 
July 29, 2015. https://medium.com/@WTTC/what-
happens-when-an-island-is-dependent-on-tourism-
871ca4465a93 

The City of San Diego Economic Development De-
partment, Economic Development Strategy 2017-
2019. https://www.sandiego.gov/sites/default/files/
economic_development_strategy_2017-2019_pdf.

Action 10 | Promote New Agricultural Models 
for Economic and Food Security

State Department of Business, Economic Develop-
ment & Tourism Office of Planning in cooperation 
with State Department of Agriculture. October 2012. 
Increased Food Security and Food Self-Sufficiency 
Strategy. http://files.hawaii.gov/dbedt/op/spb/IN-
CREASED_FOOD_SECURITY_AND_FOOD_SELF_
SUFFICIENCY_STRATEGY.pdf 

Andrews Rosenblum, LA Mag, “A Local Company 
is Building the Farm of the Future from Shipping 
Containers,” March 8, 2018. http://www.lamag.com/
citythinkblog/local-roots-farms/

Pillar II. Bouncing Forward

Action 11 | Protect Lives and Property by 
Updating Building Codes

Multihazard Mitigation Council (2018). Natural Haz-
ard Mitigation Saves: 2018 Interim Report. Principal 
Investigator Porter, K.; co-Principal Investigators 
Scawthorn, C.; Huyck, C.; Investigators: Eguchi, 
R., Hu, Z.; Reeder, A; Schneider, P., Director, MMC. 
National Institute of Building Sciences, Washington, 

D.C. www.nibs.org, https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.nibs.
org/resource/resmgr/mmc/NIBS_MSv2-2018_Inter-
im-Repor.pdf  

Gary Chock. “Assessment of Oahu Single Family 
Home Vulnerability to Hurricane Winds,” Martin & 
Chock, Inc. February 2, 2019.
City Multi-Hazard Pre-Disaster Mitigation Plan. 2011. 
http://www.honolulu.gov/demresources/plans.html 

FEMA Federal Insurance and Mitigation Admin-
istration. June 2017. Fact Sheet, “Community 
Rating System.” https://www.fema.gov/media-li-
brary-data/1507029324530-082938e6607d-
4d9eba4004890dbad39c/NFIP_CRS_Fact_
Sheet_2017_508OK.pdf 

Action 14 | Establish Future Conditions Climate 
Resilience Design Guidelines 

Action 12 | Launch Residential Hurricane Ret-
rofit Program to Strengthen Properties Vulner-
able to Hurricanes 

City Climate Change Commission, Guidance and 
Publications, “Sea Level Rise Guidance.” https://www.
resilientoahu.org/guidance-and-publications/

Gary Chock. “Assessment of Oahu Single Family 
Home Vulnerability to Hurricane Winds,” Martin & 
Chock, Inc. February 2, 2019.

State DCCA. 2015. Guide to Hurricane Strengthen-
ing for Hawai‘i Single-Family Residences. http://
cca.hawaii.gov/ins/files/2016/01/Guide-to-Hurri-
cane-Strengthening-of-Hawaii-Single-Family-Resi-
dences-Jan-2016.pdf  

National Conference of State Legislatures, “PACE FI-
NANCING,” PACE Financing or “Property Assessed 
Clean Energy” Financing is a means of financing en-
ergy efficiency upgrades, disaster resiliency improve-
ments, water conservations measures, or renewable 
energy installations. http://www.ncsl.org/research/
energy/pace-financing.aspx  

California Earthquake Authority and Governor’s 
Office of Emergency Services, California Residen-
tial Mitigation Program, Earthquake Brace + Bolt®.  
https://www.earthquakebracebolt.com/ 

Action 13 | Lower Flood Insurance Premiums 
for O‘ahu Residents through the Community 
Rating System

FEMA National Flood Insurance Program Commu-
nity Rating System. https://www.fema.gov/nation-
al-flood-insurance-program-community-rating-system 

Robert R. Holmes, Jr., and Karen Dinicola, U.S. Geo-
logical Survey. April 2010. General information Proj-
ect 106, “100-year flood – It’s all about chance: Haven’t 
we already had one this century?” https://pubs.usgs.
gov/gip/106/pdf/100-year-flood-handout-042610.pdf 

New York City Mayor’s Office of Recovery and 
Resiliency. March 2019. Climate Resiliency Design 
Guidelines, Version 3.0. https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/
orr/pdf/NYC_Climate_Resiliency_Design_Guide-
lines_v3-0.pdf 

Action 16 | Establish an O‘ahu Emergency 
Food Supply and Storage Strategy 

Caitlin Nchako and Lexin Cai, Center of Budget and 
Policy Priorities, “A Closer Look at Who Benefits from 
SNAP: State-by-State Fact Sheets,” December 3, 2018. 
https://www.cbpp.org/research/food-assistance/a-
closer-look-at-who-benefits-from-snap-state-by-state-
fact-sheets#Hawaii 

Hawaii Food Bank. 2017 Annual Report, Helping to 
Feed Hawaii’s Hungry. http://www.hawaiifoodbank.
org/Websites/foodbank/images/pdf/Annual%20Re-
port/2017%20Hawaii%20Foodbank%20Annual%20
Report.pdf 

Jeanne Cooper, SF Gate, “Kauai resort to serve as 
haven for flood relief till July,” May 2, 2018. https://
blog.sfgate.com/hawaii/2018/05/02/kauai-resort-
to-serve-as-haven-for-flood-relief-till-july/ 

Action 17 | Ensure Access to Fuel Supplies 
to Aid Disaster Response and Recovery

WPTV Webteam, WPTV. “Which gas stations can 
pump gas with no electricity,” September 06, 2017. 
https://www.wptv.com/weather/hurricane/which-gas-
stations-can-pump-gas-with-no-electricity

1 3 8

1 3 9

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.org References

References   

Pillar III. Climate Security

Action 20 | Reduce Taxpayer Expense and In-
crease Renewable Energy through a City-Wide 
Energy Performance Contract

City of Boston, Department of Environment, Renew 
Boston Trust, municipal building energy perfor-
mance contracting. https://www.boston.gov/environ-
ment-and-energy/renew-boston-trust 

Action 21 | Establish an Energy Benchmarking 
Standard for O‘ahu Commercial Buildings 

City of Seattle, Office of Sustainability & Environ-
ment, “Energy Benchmarking.” http://www.seattle.
gov/environment/climate-change/buildings-and-en-
ergy/energy-benchmarking

City of Seattle, Office of Sustainability & Environ-
ment, “Benchmarking Data Visualization Site.” http://
www.seattle.gov/energybenchmarkingmap  

Action 22 | District Cooling: Tap the Ocean to 
Cool our Buildings

Sea Water Air Conditioning, “What is a sea-water air 
conditioning system?” http://seawateraircondition-
ing.com/what-is-a-sea-water-air-conditioning-sys-
tem/ 

Enwave Energy Corporation, Downtown Toronto 
deep lake water district cooling. http://enwavetoronto.
com/district_cooling_system.html 

Action 23 | Expand Opportunities for Methane 
Capture and Re-Use

City and County of Honolulu Press Release. De-
cember 12, 2018. “City, Hawai‘i Gas open renewable 
wastewater biogas facility.” http://www.honolulu.
gov/cms-csd-menu/site-csd-sitearticles/1154-
site-csd-news-2018-cat/33441-12-12-18-city,-ha-
wai%E2%80%98i-gas-open-renewable-wastewater-
biogas-facility.html  
Action 25 | Accelerate Carbon-Free New Mo-
bility Options 

PayScale. “Cost of Living in Honolulu, Hawaii.” www.
payscale.com/cost-of-living-calculator/Hawaii-Honolulu

State of Hawai‘i Databook, Table 18.09, Vehicle Reg-
istration, by Type of Vehicle, by County: 2017 http://
files.hawaii.gov/dbedt/economic/databook/2017-indi-
vidual/18/180917.pdf 

State of Hawai‘i Databook, Table 1.06, Resident 
Population, by County: 2000 to 2017 http://files.
hawaii.gov/dbedt/economic/databook/2017-individu-
al/01/010617.pdf 

State of Hawai‘i Databook, Table 1.32, Resident Popu-
lation by Selected Age Groups, By County: 2017 http://
files.hawaii.gov/dbedt/economic/databook/2017-indi-
vidual/01/013217.pdf

American FactFinder, U.S. Census, 2013-2017 Amer-
ican Community Survey 5-Year Estimates, Means of 
Transportation to Work by Selected Characteristics 
https://factfinder.census.gov/faces/tableservices/
jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?pid=ACS_17_5YR_
S0802&prodType=table 

Bikeshare Hawai‘i, “365 Days of Biki,” July 31, 2018. 
https://gobiki.org/biki-leaks/365-days-of-biki/ 

Action 26 | Ensure Equal Access to Sustain-
able Transportation Options and Cost Savings

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, “The Social 
Cost of Carbon.” https://19january2017snapshot.epa.
gov/climatechange/social-cost-carbon_.html 

California Air Resources Board Enhanced Fleet Mod-
ernization Program. https://www.arb.ca.gov/msprog/
aqip/efmp/efmp.htm
 
California Air Resources Board Car Scrap and Re-
place Program. https://www.arb.ca.gov/msprog/lct/
vehiclescrap.htm  

Action 27 | Transform the City’s Public Fleet to 
100 Percent Renewable Fuel by 2035 and all 
Ground Transportation by 2045
Joint Press Release. December 12, 2017. City and 
County of Honolulu, County of Maui, County of 
Hawai‘i, County of Kaua‘i, “Hawai‘i’s mayors com-
mit to shared goal of 100 percent renewable ground 
transportation by 2045.” http://www.honolulu.gov/
cms-csd-menu/site-csd-sitearticles/985-site-csd-
news-2017-cat/29848-12-12-17-hawai%CA%B-

Bi%E2%80%99s-mayors-commit-to-shared-goal-
of-100-percent-renewable-ground-transporta-
tion-by-2045.html

City and County of Honolulu City Council Resolution 
18-221, “Urging the City Administration to establish 
goals for 100 percent renewable energy and a carbon 
neutral economy to accelerate the City and County of 
Honolulu’s implementation of the 2018 Global Climate 
Action Summit policies,” December 5, 2018. http://
www4.honolulu.gov/docushare/dsweb/Get/Docu-
ment-212663/DOC%20(13).PDF 

Action 28 | Chart a Climate Resilient Future by 
Creating and Implementing a Climate Adapta-
tion Strategy 

Hawai‘i Community Foundation. 2016. Wai Maoli, 
Hawai‘i Fresh Water Initiative: A Blueprint for Action 
– Water Security for an Uncertain Future. https://
www.hawaiicommunityfoundation.org/strengthening/
fresh-water
 
One World One Water. In a One Water framework all 
water, even wastewater and stormwater, is considered 
to have value and is managed in a sustainable, inclu-
sive, and integrated way. http://oneworldonewater.org/ 

Fletcher, C., Mullane, R.A., and Richmond, B.M., 1997, 
Beach loss along armored shorelines on Oahu, Hawai-
ian Islands: Journal of Coastal Research, v. 13, no. 1, p. 
209–215. http://www.soest.hawaii.edu/coasts/publica-
tions/JCRBeachLoss.pdf

Mayor’s Directive 18-2. https://www.resilientoahu.
org/s/Mayors-Directive-18-02.pdf 

City and County of Honolulu Climate Change Com-
mission, Guidance and Publications, “Sea Level Rise 
Guidance.” https://www.resilientoahu.org/guid-
ance-and-publications/
 
State of Hawai‘i Climate Change Mitigation and 
Adaptation Commission Sea Level Rise Viewer. 
www.HawaiiSeaLevelRiseViewer.org

Action 30 | Nourish and Preserve Beach Envi-
ronments through Innovation and Partnerships 

Lisa Kubota, Hawaii News Now, “Kahana Bay con-
dos aim to fight erosion with beach nourishment 
plan,” March 13, 2019. http://www.hawaiinewsnow.
com/2019/03/14/kahana-bay-condos-aim-fight-ero-
sion-with-beach-nourishment-plan/?outputType=amp 

City and County of San Francisco, Resilience in San 
Francisco. http://onesanfrancisco.org/the-plan/build-
ing-our-future-resilience-san-francisco 

Action 31 | Establish a Storm Water Enterprise 
Fund to Better Finance Storm Water Manage-
ment 

“Rising to the Challenges of Resilience and Adapta-
tion,” Piet Dircke, Global Leader of Water Manage-
ment for Arcadis, Rotterdam, Netherlands. To view 
the presentation slides and a video recording of the 
presentation, see “Announcements” at http://www.
honolulu.gov/tod/dpp-tod-home.html

Action 29 | Preserve Beaches into the Future 
with Revised Shoreline Management Rules 

Fletcher, C.H., Romine, B.M., Genz, A.S., Barbee, M.M., 
Dyer, Matthew, Anderson, T.R., Lim, S.C., Vitousek, 
Sean, Bochicchio, Christopher, and Richmond, B.M. 
2012. National assessment of shoreline change: His-
torical shoreline change in the Hawaiian Islands: U.S. 
Geological Survey Open-File Report 2011–1051, 55 p. 
https://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2011/1051/pdf/ofr2011-1051_
report_508_rev052512.pdf

City and County of Honolulu Department of Facility 
Maintenance Storm Water Quality Branch. www.clean-
waterhonolulu.com
 
Hawai‘i Revised Statutes Section 46-1.5(5)(E), Gener-
al powers and limitations of the counties. https://www.
capitol.hawaii.gov/hrscurrent/Vol02_Ch0046-0115/
HRS0046/HRS_0046-0001_0005.htm 

Revised Ordinances of Honolulu Chapter 14 Article 
33. Complete Streets. https://www.honolulu.gov/rep/site/
ocs/roh/ROH_Chapter_14a20__33.pdf 

City of Minneapolis, MN, Department of Public Works, 
Stormwater Utility Fee. http://www.minneapolismn.
gov/publicworks/stormwater/fee/stormwater_fee_
stormwater_mngmnt_feecredits 

1 4 0

1 4 1

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.org References

References   

Action 32 | Deploy Sustainable Roof Systems 
to Manage Urban Heat and Rainfal

City and County of Denver, CO, Green Buildings 
Ordinance. https://www.denvergov.org/content/den-
vergov/en/denver-development-services/commer-
cial-projects/green-roof-initiative.html
  
City and County of San Francisco, Ca, Better Roofs 
Ordinance. https://sfplanning.org/project/bet-
ter-roofs 

City of Los Angeles Cool Roof Ordinance and 
Rebate Program. https://ladbs.org/docs/de-
fault-source/publications/ordinances/cool-roof-
fact-sheet-and-faq.pdf?sfvrsn=10 

Action 33 | Keep O‘ahu Cool by Maintaining 
and Enhancing the Urban Forest

Center for Urban Forest Research, USDA Forest 
Service, Pacific Southwest Research Station. No-
vember 2007. City of Honolulu, Hawai‘i Municipal 
Forest Resource Analysis. https://www.resilientoa-
hu.org/s/Hnl-Municipal-Forest-Resource-Analy-
sis-2007.pdf 

Smart Trees Pacific, “Urban Tree Canopy Assess-
ment.” https://smarttreespacific.org/projects/hono-
lulu-urban-tree-canopy-assessment/ 

Resilient Boulder strategy, https://bouldercolorado.
gov/resilience 

Resilient Melbourne strategy, https://resilientmel-
bourne.com.au/strategy/ 

Action 34 | Minimize Economic and Property 
Risk within the Ala Wai Canal Watershed

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Ala Wai Canal Flood 
Risk Management Project - https://www.poh.usace.
army.mil/Missions/Civil-Works/Civil-Works-Proj-
ects/Ala-Wai-Flood-Risk-Management-Project/ 

FINAL.pdf?ver=2017-05-24-115820-123 

Ala Wai Watershed Collaboration. http://alawai.
hawaiigreengrowth.org/ 

National Weather Service, “Manoa Valley Flood Oct 
30, 2004.” https://www.weather.gov/hfo/Manoa-
Flood20041030  

National Weather Service, “Unprecedented Ex-
tended Wet Period across Hawaii – February 19 to 
April 2, 2006.” https://www.weather.gov/hfo/weeks-
rain 

Pillar IV. Community Cohesion

This definition is primarily drawn from the Island-
er Institute, although the Laulima Working Group 
added the following elements to the Institute’s 
definition: “and natural resources” and “culture of” 
aloha. http://www.islanderinstitute.com/   

Danielle Baussan, Center for American Progress. 
“Social Cohesion: The Secret Weapon in the Fight 
for Equitable Climate Resilience,” May 11, 2015. 
https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/green/
reports/2015/05/11/112873/social-cohesion-the-se-
cret-weapon-in-the-fight-for-equitable-climate-re-
silience/

Action 35 | Increase Coordination with 
Neighborhood Emergency Preparedness 
Groups

City and County of Honolulu Department of Emer-
gency Management, Community Preparedness 
Groups. http://www.honolulu.gov/demvolunteer/
communitypreparedness.html

Christie Wilson, Honolulu Star Advertiser, “Heroes 
Next Door: Danny Tengan helps prep neighbors 
for ‘the big one,’” December 26, 2018. https://www.
staradvertiser.com/2018/12/26/hawaii-news/ten-
gan-helps-prepare-neighbors-for-the-big-on/

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Final Environmental 
Impact Statement and Feasibility Study, Ala Wai 
Canal Flood Risk Management Project. https://
www.poh.usace.army.mil/Portals/10/docs/projec-
treviewplans/Ala%20Wai_FeasibilityReportEIS_

Action 36 | Increase City-Community Rela-
tionships through Volunteerism
 
Information compiled by the City and County of 
Honolulu Office of Climate Change, Sustainability 

and Resiliency from IRS, https://www.irs.gov/chari-
ties-non-profits/exempt-organizations-business-mas-
ter-file-extract-eo-bmf

City and County of Honolulu Department of Parks 
and Recreation, Adopt A Park program. http://www.
honolulu.gov/parks/default/park-locations/182-site-
dpr-cat/18317-adopt-a-park.html 

Action 37 | Weave a Tighter Community With 
Neighborhood Gatherings

City and County of San Francisco, Neighborhood Em-
powerment Network, Neighborfest Program. http://
www.empowersf.org/neighborfest/  

Action 38 | Empower Neighborhoods to 
Co-Design Safe and Complete Streets

Natanya Friedheim, Honolulu Civil Beat, “Can Set-
ting Out Tables, Painting Street Murals Transform 
Honolulu’s Neighborhoods?” November 13, 2018. 
https://www.civilbeat.org/2018/11/can-setting-out-ta-
bles-painting-street-murals-transform-honolu-
lus-neighborhoods/

City and County of Honolulu Department of Trans-
portation Services, Complete Streets Program. http://
www.honolulu.gov/completestreets 

Action 39 | Celebrate O‘ahu’s Resilient Past 
and Future through Public Art

 “Layers of Honolulu: The Mo‘o Speaks/Continuity of 
Place and Generations,” Bloomberg Philanthropies 
Public Art Challenge Finalist. https://www.layersofho-
nolulu.com/ 

Brian Kahn, Climate Central, “These Paintings Turn 
Climate Data Into Art,” February 2, 2016. https://www.
climatecentral.org/news/these-paintings-turn-cli-
mate-data-into-art-19986 
Action 40 | Lift Up Positive Examples of Island 
Values in Action
 
Statewide Aloha+ Challenge 2030 Sustainability 
Goals and Dashboard. https://dashboard.hawaii.gov/
aloha-challenge 

United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. 

https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustain-
able-development-goals/ 

Action 41 | Launch a Place-Based Resilience 
Training Program for City Leadership

Hawai‘i Revised Statutes Section 10-42, Training 
relating to native Hawaiian and Hawaiian traditional 
and customary rights, natural resources and access 
rights, and the public trust. https://www.capitol.ha-
waii.gov/hrscurrent/Vol01_Ch0001-0042F/HRS0010/
HRS_0010-0042.htm

Beverly Creamer, University of Hawai‘i News, “Local 
decision-makers receive training on Native Hawai-
ian law,” May 31, 2018. https://www.hawaii.edu/
news/2018/05/31/native-hawaiian-law-training/

Action 42 | Foster Shared Understanding of 
Climate Change Island-Wide Though an Out-
reach Campaign

Yale Program on Climate Change Communication, 
Yale Climate Opinion Maps 2018. http://climate-
communication.yale.edu/visualizations-data/
ycom-us-2018/?est=happening&type=value&-
geo=county&id=15003

Makara Beach Portal and Project, Wellington, New 
Zealand. http://makara-wcc.opendata.arcgis.com/ 

Action 43 | Ensure City Partnership in O‘ahu’s 
Collective Impact Resilience Efforts

Statewide Aloha+ Challenge 2030 Sustainability 
Goals and Dashboard. https://dashboard.hawaii.gov/
aloha-challenge 

Hawai‘i Community Foundation CHANGE Frame-
work: Community & Economy, Health & Welfare, Arts 
& Culture, Natural Environment, Government & Civ-
ics, Education. https://www.hawaiicommunityfounda-
tion.org/we-are-changing-hawaii-together 

Action 44 | Create a City-Community Liaison 
to Leverage Non-Profit and Volunteer Assets

Information compiled by the City and County of 
Honolulu Office of Climate Change, Sustainability 
and Resiliency from IRS. https://www.irs.gov/chari-

1 4 2

1 4 3

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.orgGlossary

 References

ties-non-profits/exempt-organizations-business-mas-
ter-file-extract-eo-bmf 

City and County of Honolulu Department of Commu-
nity Services, Nonprofit Grants. http://www.honolulu.
gov/dcs/nonprofit-grants.html 

City of Laredo, TX, Community Development Depart-
ment, Nonprofit Management and Volunteer Center. 
http://www.cityoflaredo.com/CommDev/NonProfit/
NonProfit.htm 

Implementing Resilience for O‘ahu

Mayor’s Directive 18-2, https://www.resilientoahu.
org/s/Mayors-Directive-18-02.pdf

City of Boulder, CO, Sustainability + Resilience 
Framework, https://bouldercolorado.gov/budget

City of New Orleans, LA, Resilience Design Review 
Committee, https://new.nola.gov/resilience/designre-
view/ 

City and County of San Francisco, CA, Capital Plan-
ning, http://onesanfrancisco.org/
 
City of New Orleans, LA, Hazard Mitigation, https://
new.nola.gov/hazard-mitigation/ 

King County, WA, Green Procurement Code, https://
aqua.kingcounty.gov/council/clerk/code/21_Title_18.
pdf 

100RC Platform Partners, http://www.100resilientci-
ties.org/partners/

1 4 4

O ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E   S T R A T E G Y    «

Photo by Philip Rasca

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 4 5

 Glossary

Glossary   

Glossary

100 Resilient Cities (100RC): 100 Resilient 
Cities—Pioneered by The Rockefeller Foundation is 
dedicated to helping cities around the world become 
more resilient to the physical, social and economic 
challenges that are a growing part of the 21st Centu-
ry by supporting them in the creation of Resilience 
Strategies and implementation of these strategies.

City Resilience Framework (CRF): Developed 
by Arup with support from the Rockefeller 
Foundation, the City Resilience Framework pro-
vides a lens to understand the complexity of cities 
and the drivers that contribute to their resilience, 
and a common language that enables cities to share 
knowledge and experiences.

Climate Action Plan (CAP): A community-spe-
cific strategy combat climate change and elimi-
nate fossil fuel emission—the root cause of global 
warming. A CAP lays out a detailed list of programs, 
policies, and actions that a community will take 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions over time to 
achieve its emissions reduction targets and goals.

Climate Adaptation Strategy (CAS): A suite 
of actions, programs, and investments to be more 
prepared for a changing climate by reducing the po-
tential impacts of climate change—such as increased 
heat, rainfall flooding, and sea level rise—to people, 
buildings, infrastructure, and natural systems. A 
CAS is informed by risk and vulnerability assess-
ments, climate science, and community visions for a 
risk-reduced and healthier community.

Climate Change Adaptation: Adjustment in 
natural or human systems (e.g. through deliberate 
policy decision) in response to actual or expected 
climatic stimuli or their effects, which moderates 
harm or exploits beneficial opportunities. (Defini-
tion from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change). 

Climate Change Mitigation: Refers to efforts 
to reduce or prevent emission of greenhouse gases. 
Mitigation can mean using new technologies and 
renewable energies, making older equipment more 
energy efficient, or changing management practic-
es or consumer behavior (Definition from United 
Nations Environment Programme). 

Phase I: The first phase of the Resilience Strategy 
development process, designed to conduct a holistic 
scan of the city’s pulse on resilience, establish the 
office of the CRO, and begin to engage and galvanize 
stakeholders, critical voices and experts around 
resilience.

Phase II: The second phase of the Resilience Strat-
egy development process, building on the mobiliza-
tion and analysis of Phase 1, featuring partnership 
with diverse and interdisciplinary Working Group 
teams and Platform Partners to explore the city’s 
challenges as defined in Phase I.

Platform Partner: Partners from the private, pub-
lic, academic, and nonprofit sectors who have agreed 
to provide 100RC Member Cities with free access 
to resilience-building tools, services and technical 
assistance.

Resilience: The capacity of individuals, commu-
nities, institutions, businesses and systems within 
a city to survive, adapt and thrive no matter what 
kinds of chronic stresses or acute shocks they en-
counter.

Resilience Action: Recommendations for specific 
tasks, initiatives, projects, or policies that the City 
might take either to 1) advance a resilience goal the 
City has already set; 2) set new resilience goals for 
the City; or 3) generate baseline data or fill informa-
tion gaps needed to address an identified need. 

Resilience Dividend: A range of net positive 
benefits—from cost savings and cost avoidance to 
better outcomes for vulnerable populations—that 
result from integrated, inclusive, and risk-aware de-
cision-making. When discrete interventions achieve 
multiple benefits across multiple systems as a result 
of applying a Resilience Lens.

Resilience Lens: An analytical framework to evaluate 
options and ensure city actions achieve multiple positive 
outcomes while mitigating negative consequences

Resilience Office: City and County of Honolulu’s Office of 
Climate Change, Sustainability and Resiliency. 

Resilience Strategy: A chief output of the City’s involve-
ment with 100RC. The purpose of the Resilience Strategy is 
to build the capacity of individuals, communities, institu-
tions, businesses and systems of O‘ahu to be more resilient.

Resilience Strategy Steering Committee: A group of 
business, organizational, and community leaders who serve 
as lead advisers and masthead endorsers for the creation and 
implementation of O‘ahu’s Resilience Strategy.

Shock: An acute natural or man-made event or phenom-
enon threatening major loss of life, damage to assets and a 
city’s ability to function and provide basic services, particu-
larly for poor or vulnerable populations. 

Strategy Partner: The consultant team hired by 100RC to 
support the CRO through the Strategy development process.

Stress: A chronic (ongoing or cyclical) natural or man-
made event or phenomenon that renders the city less able to 
function and provide basic services, particularly for poor or 
vulnerable populations, and which challenges the ability to 
perform during and after a shock.

Working Groups: Volunteer participants—from the com-
munity, nonprofit, business, and government sectors—who 
drove the Phase II research identification and Resilience 
Action development processes, supported by Resilience 
Office staff. There were five working groups focused on 
the challenges and opportunities defined through Phase 
I: Remaining Rooted, Bouncing Forward, Climate Change 
Mitigation, Climate Change Adaptation, and Laulima.

1 4 6

1 4 7

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.orgAcknowledgements

 Glossary

Acronyms

City
BWS 
BFS 
DCS 
DDC 
DEM 
DES 
DFM 
DHR 
DIT 
DLM 
DPR 
DPP 
DTS 
ENV 
HART 
HESD 
HFD 
HOU 
HPD 
MAY 
MDO 
MOCA 
NCO 
OED 
OahuMPO 

State
DBEDT 
DCCA 
DHHL 
DLNR 
DOA 
DOE 
DOH 
DOT 
DOTAX 
HI-EMA 
NDPTC 
OHA 
OP 
UH 

Federal
CNCS 
DOE 
FEMA 
HUD 
NWS 
USACE 

Honolulu Board of Water Supply
Department of Budget and Fiscal Services
Department of Community Services
Department of Design and Construction
Department of Emergency Management
Department of Enterprise Services
Department of Facility Maintenance
Department of Human Resources
Department of Information Technology
Department of Land Management
Department of Parks and Recreation
Department of Planning and Permitting
Department of Transportation Services
Department of Environmental Services
Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation
Honolulu Emergency Services Department
Honolulu Fire Department
Office of Housing
Honolulu Police Department

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Mayor’s Office
  Managing Director’s Office
  Mayor’s Office of Culture and the Arts
 
 
 

Neighborhood Commission Office
Office of Economic Development
O‘ahu Metropolitan Planning Organization

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Department of Business, Economic Development and Tourism
Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs
Department of Hawaiian Home Lands
Department of Land and Natural Resources
Department of Agriculture
Department of Education
Department of Health
Department of Transportation
Department of Taxation
Hawai‘i Emergency Management Agency
National Disaster Preparedness Training Center (at UH)
Office of Hawaiian Affairs
Office of Planning
University of Hawai‘i

Corporation for National and Community Service
Department of Energy
Federal Emergency Management Agency
Department of Housing and Urban Development
National Weather Services
U.S. Army Corp of Engineers

1 4 8

Photo credit: Resilience Office

»   r e s i l i e n t o a h u . o r g

1 4 9
1 4 9

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.org Acknowledgements

Acknowledgements   

Mahalo to the following working group members 
for their time, expertise, and dedication to carry 
these actions forward.

Remaining Rooted 
WORKING GROUP MEMBERS

Co-Chair, Catherine Awakuni Colon
State Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs

Gladys Marrone
Building Industry Association of Hawai‘i

Co-Chair, Marc Alexander
City Office of Housing

Cindy Adams
Aloha United Way

Robbie Alm
Collaborative Leaders Network

Todd Apo
Howard Hughes Corporation

Cathy Camp
Kamehameha Schools

Mark Garrity
Urban Pacific Consulting LLC

Dick Gushman
DGM Group

Hunter Heaivilin
Sierra Club Hawai‘i, O‘ahu Group

Andrew Malahoff
Office of City Councilmember Ikaika Anderson

Melissa Miyashiro
Blue Planet Foundation

Pono Shim
O‘ahu Economic Development Board

Susan Tai
Hawai‘i Energy

Gavin Thornton
Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law and Economic 
Justice

Ben Trevino
Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation

Cade Watanabe
UNITE HERE, Local 5

Jen Wilbur
Chamber of Commerce Hawai‘i

Gwen Yamamoto-Lau
State Hawai‘i Green Infrastructure Authority

Keone Kealoha
Kanu Hawai‘i 
Dotty Kelly-Paddock
Hau‘ula Emergency Leadership Plan

Karl Kim
National Disaster Preparedness Training Center 

Coralie Matayoshi
American Red Cross Hawai‘i 

Ron Mizutani
Hawai‘i Foodbank

Mike Onofrietti
Island Insurance Companies

Rob Porro
National Disaster Preparedness Training Center

Scott Seu
Hawaiian Electric  

Jeannine Souki
Hawai‘i  Gas

Colin Yost
Partnership for Pacific Resilience

Bouncing Forward 
WORKING GROUP MEMBERS

Co-Chair, Ramona Mullahey
US Department of Housing and Urban Development

Co-Chair, Hiro Toiya
City Department of Emergency Management

Lynn Bailey
State Department of Health

Aaron Cates
Kunoa Cattle

Gary Chock
Martin & Chock, Inc.

Captain Barry Choy
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

Jimmie Collins
United States Indo-Pacific Command

Celeste Connors
Hawai‘i Green Growth Local2030 Hub

Sunny Greer
Emergency Management Professionals of Hawai‘i 

Pono Higa
Wai‘anae Coast Disaster Readiness Team

Chris Hong
AIA Honolulu

James Howe
Honolulu Emergency Services Department
Michael Iwashita
National Disaster Preparedness Training Center

Tim Johns
Zephyr Insurance

1 5 0

1 5 1

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.org Acknowledgements

Acknowledgements   

Climate Security (Mitigation) 
WORKING GROUP MEMBERS

Co-Chair, Dawn Lippert
Elemental Excelerator

Co-Chair, Aki Marceau
Elemental Excelerator

Brandon Hayashi
Engie

Brian Kealoha
Hawai‘i  Energy 

Co-Chair, Jon Nouchi
City Department of Transportation Services

Jeff Mikulina
Blue Planet Foundation

Gareth Sakakida
Hawai‘i Transportation Association

Jerrod Schreck
Alexander & Baldwin

Ann Botticelli
Hawaiian Airlines

Amy Brinker
Kamehameha Schools

Colton Ching
Hawaiian Electric 

Murray Clay
Ulupono

Makena Coffman
University of Hawai‘i DURP

Susan Crow
University of Hawai‘i  NREM

Joe Ferraro
Ferraro Choi and Associates

Will Giese
Hawai‘i  Solar Energy Association

Scott Glenn
State Office of Environmental Quality Control

Tyler Gomes
Elemental Excelerator

Climate Security (Adaptation)  
WORKING GROUP MEMBERS

Co-Chair, Lorraine Akiba
LHA Ventures

Kirstin Punu
Naval Facilities Engineering Command

Co-Chair, Robert Kroning
City Department of Design and Construction

Brad Romine
University of Hawai‘i Sea Grant College Program

Harrison Rue
City Department of Planning and Permitting

Ross Sasamura
City Department of Facility Maintenance

Daniele Spirandelli
University of Hawai‘i DURP

Genevieve Sullivan
State Department of Transportation

Barry Usagawa
Honolulu Board of Water Supply

Cheryl Walthall
Pacific Resource Partnership

Wesley Babcock
Kamehameha Schools

Danielle Bass
State Office of Planning

Nancy Convard
Stantec Inc.

Kitty Courtney
Tetra Tech Inc.

Rick Egged
Waikīkī Improvement Association

Julius Fischer
Hawai‘i Green Growth Local2030 Hub

Chip Fletcher
University of Hawai‘i SOEST

Mike Foley
Oceanit

Tim Houghton
City Department of Environmental Services

George Kam
Quicksilver

Victoria Keener
East-West Center

1 5 2

1 5 3

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.org Acknowledgements

Acknowledgements   

Kahi Pacarro
Sustainable Coastlines Hawai‘i

Scotty Reis-Moniz
Waimānalo Canoe Club

Breanna Rose
Hawai‘i Green Growth Local2030 Hub

Nate Serota
City Department of Parks and Recreation

Bruce Tsuchida
Townscape Inc.

Elisa Yadao
Hawai‘i Medical Service Association

Community Cohesion 
WORKING GROUP MEMBERS

Co-Chair, Shelee Kimura
Hawaiian Electric Company 

Co-Chair, Rebecca Soon
City Department of Community Services

Matthew Bauer
Kupu

Kevin Chang
Kua‘āina Ulu ‘Auamo

Doug Cole
North Shore Community Land Trust

Kealoha Fox
State Office of Hawaiian Affairs

Jan Harada
HT Hayashi Foundation

Brent Kakesako
Hawai‘i Alliance for Community-Based Economic 
Development

Micah A. Kāne
Hawai‘i Community Foundation

Keoni Lee
‘Ōiwi TV

Maluhia Low
State Office of Hawaiian Affairs 

Jodi Malinoski
Sierra Club Hawai‘i

Lauren Nahme
Kamehameha Schools

Kathy K. Sokugawa
Acting Director
Department of Planning & Permitting

Hirokazu Toiya
Director
Department of Emergency Management

Barry Usagawa, P.E.
Program Administrator, Water Resources Division
Board of Water Supply

City Resilience Team

Marc Alexander
Executive Director
Office of Housing

Paul Aoki
Acting Corporation Counsel
Department of Corporation Counsel

Edwin P. Hawkins, Jr. 
Executive Director
Office of Economic Development

Tim Houghton
Deputy Director
Department of Environmental Services

Guy Kaulukukui
Director
Department of Enterprise Services

Robert J. Kroning, P.E.
Director
Department of Design &Construction

Michele Nekota
Director
Department of Parks & Recreation

Jon Y. Nouchi
Deputy Director
Department of Transportation Services

Harrison Rue
Community Building & TOD Administrator
Department of Planning and Permitting

Ross S. Sasamura, P.E.
Director & Chief Engineer
Department of Facility Maintenance

1 5 4

1 5 5

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.org Acknowledgements

Acknowledgements   

Organizations Interviewed 
During Preliminary Resilience 
Assessment*

Aloha United Way
American Red Cross of Hawai‘i
Bishop Museum
Collaborative Leaders Network
Counter Culture/Farm Link
Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law and Economic 
Justice
Hawai‘i Emergency Management Agency
Hawai‘i Foodbank
Hawai‘i Alliance for Community-Based Economic 
Development
Hawaiian Community Assets
Institute for Human Services
Island Growth
Kokua Kalihi Valley
Kupu
Legal Aid Society of Hawai‘i
MA‘O Farms

Moanalua Gardens
North Shore Economic Vitality Partnership
PacIOOS
Parents and Children Together
Patagonia
Renewable Energy Action Coalition of Hawai‘i 
Rotary Club of Kapolei 
Sierra Club Hawai‘i
St. Elizabeth Church
State Office of Hawaiian Affairs
Sustainable Coastlines Hawai‘i
The Trust for Public Land Hawai‘i
UH Mānoa DURP
Ulupono Initiative
Waialua Hawaiian Civic Club
Waikīkī Health
We Are Oceania
YWCA Honolulu

*The above list indicates those organizations that were engaged in individual/small 
group interviews and surveys during the Preliminary Resilience Assessment (Phase 
I) outside of other larger community or organizational engagement sessions. More-
over, many other non-affiliated individuals were interviewed during this process.

100RC Resilient Cities

100RC Partner Cities

Atlanta, GA
Boulder, CO
Boston, MA
Los Angeles, CA
Melbourne, Vic, Australia
Greater Miami and the Beaches, FL
New Orleans, LA
New York, NY
Norfolk, VA
San Francisco, CA
Seattle, WA
Singapore
Toronto, ON, Canada
Vancouver, BC, Canada

Communications 
& Design

Sheila Sarhangi
Cause Consulting, LLC

Warren Daubert 
Daubert Design Co.

Michael Berkowitz
Nicole Bohrer-Kaplan
Katrin Bruebach
Andrew Brenner
Mariane Jang
Peter Jenkins
Rebecca Laberenne
Corinne LeTourneau
Paul Lillehaugen
Mina Nabizada
Uthman Olagoke
Andrew Salkin
Stewart Sarkozy-Banoczy
Smita Rawoot
Otis Rolley
Jason Whittet
Eric Wilson
Elizabeth Yee

100RC Strategy 
Partner: AECOM

Claire Bonham-Carter
Kevin Butterbaugh
Shereen D’Souza
Joshua Lathan
Jeff Merz
Paul Peninger
Johannes Veerkamp

1 5 6

1 5 7

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.orgPhoto by 
Sean Marrs

1 5 8

1 5 9

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «» resilientoahu.orgO ‘ A H U   R E S I L I E N C E
S T R A T E G Y

1 6 0

O‘AHU RESILIENCE STRATEGY  «