RESILIENT

CAN 
TH

Cần Thơ Resilience Strategy 
UNTIL 2030

RESILIENT

CAN 
TH

PEACEFUL – PROSPEROUS CẦN THƠ CITY

Cần Thơ Resilience Strategy 
UNTIL 2030

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2014

RESILIENT

CAN 
TH

Contents 

6 
6 
8 

INTRODUCTION 
Message from the city leadership
Message from 100RC 

12  RESILIENCE APPROACH AND STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT  
 
14 
17 

PROCESS
Approach to building resilience 
City Resilience Strategy Development Process 

 

22  OVERVIEW OF CẦN THƠ CITY
24 
26 
30 

Brief history of the city 
Natural, economic and social conditions
Cần Thơ in the future 

34  CITY RESILIENCE CHALLENGES
36 
40 

Shocks and stresses
Overview of the resilience of Cần Thơ City 

50  CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGY
52 
54 
56 
64 
76 
88 

VISION AND GOAL 
RESILIENCE ACTIONS
Direction 1: Leadership and Strategy 
Direction 2: Infrastructure and Environment 
Direction 3: Economy and Society 
Direction 4: Health and Well-being

98  STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION
100 
101  Monitoring and Evaluation 

Implementation organization and stakeholder roles 

104  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

106  APPENDICES

110  REFERENCES

Nguyễn Thơ © ISET-International, 2018

MESSAGE FROM THE CITY LEADERSHIP

RESILIENT

CAN 
TH

Cần Thơ is a dynamic city located at the center of the Cửu Long River Delta, by the side 
of the peaceful Hậu (Bassac) River. Cần Thơ prides itself with the unique beauty of a 
dense network of interlacing rivers, channels and canals, which creates a distinctive 
riverscape culture. Through the rise and fall and upheavals in its establishment and 
development history, Cần Thơ City of today enjoys the status of a Category I City 
under direct national administration, and the center of the Cửu Long Delta Key 
Economic Zone. 

In the process of its formation, development, and economic integration, Cần Thơ has 
faced and will continue to face multiple shocks and stresses across different aspects, 
such as flooding and inundation, tidal surges, extreme heat waves, aging infrastructure, 
pollution, diseases, poverty, unemployment, unstable export markets and prices, legal 
and technical barriers of export markets, and global economic recessions, among 
others. These shocks and stresses are growing in frequency and intensity, and are 
becoming more difficult to predict. In this context, building resilience of the people, 
government, and systems of the city is a matter of critical urgency. 

From the early days of the 100 Resilient Cities project in December 2016, we have 
determined to pursue “working together to bring out the best from all resources” as 
the overarching principle for the Resilience Strategy development process in Cần 
Thơ City. With our great efforts, the Cần Thơ Resilience Strategy until 2030 has now 
been completed. This is the result of almost two years of constant, highly committed 
and dedicated efforts of local government leaders across levels, city departments, 
associations, experts from institutes and universities in the city, technical staff of city 
departments, enterprises, as well as local communities. The full cooperation of all 
related stakeholders is a key highlight of the strategy development process. This makes 
us realize that no single organization or partner can single-handedly resolve for us the 
issue that our city is facing. Instead, building and strengthening resilience requires joint 
efforts of the entire city government system and local people altogether. 

MR. ĐÀO ANH DŨNG
Vice Chairman 
Cần Thơ City People’s Committee 

The City Resilience Strategy (CRS) clearly identified the challenges in health and well-
being, economy and society, infrastructure and environment, and governance that the 
people, enterprises and government of our city have been and will be facing, as well 
as specific immediate and long-term actions that our city has to implement to develop 
Cần Thơ as a green, sustainable, proactive and integrated river city where people 
enjoy prosperity and safety from shocks and stresses, and no one is left behind. 
To successfully implement this strategy, the city will need the consensus and close 
collaboration between local governments across levels, departments, associations, 
enterprises and individuals. We need extensive cooperation with domestic and 
international partners, and highly value all of your support. 

We are tremendously proud to present the Cần Thơ Resilience Strategy, which represents 
a new approach, new way of thinking, and new knowledge to connect our citizens 
with our city government, towards the common goal of building Cần Thơ to be ever 
thriving in the face of the expected shocks and stresses of the 21st century. Once again, 
let us emphasize that “working together” is the key to the successful development and 
implementation of the Cần Thơ Resilience Strategy. 

In the capacity of a city government representative, I would like to call for the continued 
cooperation and support of the people of Cần Thơ, as well as of organizations, individuals 
and partners from Vietnam and internationally, with the city government to sustain and 
push forward resilience building for our city in the years to come./.

Yours sincerely,

 

ĐÀO ANH DŨNG
Vice Chairman of Cần Thơ City People’s Committee

KẾ HOẠCH TĂNG CƯỜNG KHẢ NĂNG CHỐNG CHỊU ĐẾN 2030 CỦA THÀNH PHỐ CẦN THƠ 

MESSAGE FROM 100RC

RESILIENT

CAN 
TH

On behalf of 100 Resilient Cities, it is my honor to congratulate the city of Can Tho on 
the release of its Resilience Strategy. The strategy presents a significant shift in how the 
city works – one that entails extensive stakeholder engagement, holistic assessment, 
and partnership with leaders across the public and private sectors and the community. 
None of that would have been possible without the unwavering support from Vice 
Chairman Mr. Đào Anh Dũng and the tireless dedication of Chief Resilience Officer Dr. 
Nguyen Hieu Trung and his remarkable team. 

Can Tho is a rapidly growing city in the heart of the Mekong Delta. It is a city that faces 
multiple threats to achieving its development goals – including seasonal flooding, 
sea-level rise, water pollution, land subsidence, and uncontrolled urbanization, to 
name just a few. Can Tho’s ambitious vision for its future is to transform into a regional 
and national hub of industry, commerce, and services. Can Tho’s challenge is to use 
the strength of its talented population, geographic advantages and natural resources 
to bring dynamism to its economy, while creating opportunity and income for all 
inhabitants – and at the same time, protecting the integrity of the river that flows 
through the heart of the city.

This strategy puts forward actions that directly seek to reconcile robust future growth 
with environmental considerations. And the city has already demonstrated some 
success. Dr. Trung and his team have piloted tactical urbanism at the neighborhood 
scale to address community-level waste management and build an appreciation for 
urban green spaces in managing flood risk. The city participated in the Resilience 
Accelerator program – a partnership with the Center for Resilient Cities and Landscapes 
at Columbia University and Can Tho University – to produce urban design principles 
for nature-based infrastructure investments and conceptual urban design proposals. 

MICHAEL BERKOWITZ
President  
100 Resilient Cities

A public park in An Khánh ward has already been earmarked to test the effectiveness of 
these concepts for stormwater management – and assess the wider social, economic, 
and environmental benefits to the city.  

As this strategy attests, only collective effort will enable Can Tho to achieve its vision 
of becoming a green, safe, prosperous, and inclusive city. Together, the actions within 
this document will have a transformational impact on the resilience of the city and 
its inhabitants. But their successful implementation will require collective effort, 
collaboration and coordination across departments and higher levels of government, 
donor agencies and other international organizations, businesses and – of course – 
residents themselves. I am excited to see this work unfold and believe that Can Tho is 
poised to play a leading role in promoting urban resilience, not just within the Mekong 
Delta region, but nationally and around the world.

Yours faithfully, 

 

 

MICHAEL BERKOWITZ
President  of the 100 Resilient Cities   

ABBREVIATION

100 Resilient Cities

100RC
CCCO Climate Change Coordination Office 
CIEM Central Institute for Economic Management 
CISED Cần Thơ Institute for Socio-Economic Development

City Resilience Framework

CRF
CRO City Resilience Office

CSIRO Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization
DARD Department of Agriculture and Rural Development
DOC Department of Construction

DOCST Department of Culture, Sports and Tourism

DOF Department of Finance 
DOH Department of Health
DOIC Department of Information and Communication
DOIT Department of Industry and Trade

DOLISA Department of Labors, War Invalids and Social Affairs

DOST Department of Science and Technology
DOT Department of Transport 
DPI Department of Planning and Investment 
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GRDP Gross Regional Domestic Product

Institute for Social and Environmental Transition

ISET
JSC
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation

Job Services Centre

CẦN THƠ CITY & RESILIENCE 
Living in a low-lying area, for hundreds of years now, people in Cần 

Thơ in particular and in the Cửu Long River Delta (Vietnamese part 

of the Mekong River Delta) in general have been subjected to the impacts of 
flooding and inundation. Living conditions and livelihoods in the Delta were 
historically well adapted to the regular pattern of seasonal flooding, which 
residents and local governments describe as a “living-with-floods” strategy. 
However, during the past few years, flooding has become less predictable 
and more damaging due to a multitude of factors such as climate change, 
land subsidence and urban development. This creates many challenges for 
the living-with-floods strategy. In addition, the city has been facing many 
other challenges such as extreme heat waves, infectious disease epidemics, 
environmental pollution, water resource depletion, and economic recessions. 
These challenges also have grown in severity and unpredictability, and 
are often characterized by inter-disciplinary, inter-regional and even 
global linkages. The city needs new systemic and integrated directions and 
solutions that are robust enough for the local, regional and global challenges. 
In this context, the concept of resilience is considered a useful way to 
support the city in addressing these issues. This approach has been applied 
in hundreds of cities around the world, including major cities such as New 
York, Paris, Sydney, Rotterdam and Seoul. This is a key rationale for Cần 
Thơ City to engage in the 100 Resilient Cities (100RC) program. 

NAFOSTED National Foundation for Science and Technology Development 

OCOP One Commune One Product
ODA Official Development Aid

PC

People’s Committee

PMU  Project Management Unit
SECO Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs
VBSP
VCCI
VIDS

Vietnam Institute for Development Strategy

Vietnam Chamber of Commerce

Vietnam Bank for Social Policies 

WB World Bank

Nguyễn Thơ © ISET-International, 2013

RESILIENCE APPROACH   
& STRATEGY 
DEVELOPMENT  PROCESS  

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2014

APPROACH TO BUILDING 
RESILIENCE 

The City Resilience Strategy of Cần Thơ has been 
developed based on the City Resilience Framework 
(CRF) and guided by the following principles: 

•  Ensuring effective and pro-active 

participation of all stakeholders, including 
government agencies, the private sector, 
local communities, civil society, associations, 
research institutes and universities. 

•  Analyses and assessments are conducted 

in a comprehensive, systematic and 
interdisciplinary manner. 

•  Analyses and assessments consider not only 

natural hazards but also other potential 
economic, social and environmental shocks. 

•  Analyses and assessments consider the 

economic, social and environmental 
conditions of the city both at present and in 
the future. 

CITY RESILIENCE 
FRAMEWORK
According to the CRF, Resilience is defined as the 
capacity of individuals, communities, institutions, 
businesses, and systems within a city to survive, 
adapt, and grow, no matter what kinds of chronic 
stresses and acute shocks they experience. 

The resilience of a system, individual or community 
is demonstrated in seven qualities: reflectiveness, 
resourcefulness, robustness, redundancy, 
flexibility, inclusiveness, and integration (see 
Appendix 1).

The CRF provides a basis to assess and analyze 
cities’ complex issues and systems and identify 
factors that constitute their resilience. The analysis 
and consideration of these factors allow cities 
to identify their strengths and weaknesses, as 
well as their most pressing problems, so as to 
design appropriate actions and programs for 
resilience building. 

The CRF is built on four essential dimensions of 
urban resilience as seen on the next page.

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2016

1

2

4

3

1. Leadership & Strategy 
Effective leadership, empowered stakeholders, and 
integrated planning.

2. Infrastructure and Environment 
The way in which manmade and natural 
infrastructure provides critical services, and protects 
and connects urban citizens.

3. Economy and Society 
The social and financial organizations that 
enable urban population to live peacefully and 
act collectively.

4. Health & Wellbeing 
The health and wellbeing of everyone living and 
working in the city.

14

15

RESILIENCE APPROACH AND STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT  PROCESSCAN THRESILIENT1234Figure 1.
CITY RESILIENCE FRAMEWORK*

CITY RESILIENCE STRATEGY 
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS 

The City Resilience Strategy development process 
of Cần Thơ consists of two phases (see Figure 2). 
In the first phase, the city focused on collecting 
data, conducting overall resilience assessment, 
mobilizing the participation of communities and 
stakeholders, analyzing the current performance 
of urban systems, and identifying priority areas of 

actions. Phase I was also the opportunity to assess, 
synthesize and begin connecting existing resilience 
building efforts of the city with the City Resilience 
Strategy.

Figure 2.
THE CITY RESILIENCE STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT PROCESS 

PHASE I

PHASE II

I

*According to the City Resilience Framework of the 100RC program

Each dimension contains three drivers, which 
reflect the actions cities can take to improve their 
resilience. Each driver in turn is specified by specific 
indicators (see Figure 1).

Besides the CRF, Cần Thơ also applied tools 
developed by 100RC such as City Resilience 
Actions Inventory and City Resilience Perceptions 

Assessment, and other tools, such as satellite 
image analysis to identify changes in green and 
blue surface coverage, VENSIM tool to calculate the 
contribution of green infrastructure in improving 
rainwater storage and infiltration capacity, in-depth 
interviews, and focus group discussions.

TEAM 
MOBILIZATION 
CRO Office
Advisory Board
Working group

RESILIENCE 
ASSESSMENT  
•  Identifying shocks 

and stresses 

•  Assessing 

perspectives 
and analyzing 
resilience actions 

•  Analyzing city 

context 

Identifying 
focus     
areas

Resilience 
Strategy

•  Analyzing 
focus areas

•  Defining 

vision, 
objectives, 
and 
resilience 
actions 

STAKEHOLDER PARTICIPATION AND SUPPORT

16

I

M
P
L
E
M
E
N
T
A
T
I
O
N

 

N
S
T
I
T
U
T
I
O
N
A
L
I

Z
A
T
I
O
N
A
N
D

 

 

17

RESILIENCE APPROACH AND STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT  PROCESSCAN THRESILIENTBased on Phase I results, in Phase II, the city conducted in-depth research into the 
discovery areas and used their results as the basis for identifying and designing actions to 
build resilience for the city. Priority discovery areas investigated during Phase II include: 

Improving the effectiveness 
of cross-sectoral coordination 
mechanisms of the other three 
discovery areas to build resilience 
for the city.

Strengthening the resilience 
of Cần Thơ City through green 
infrastructure measures

Strengthening the resilience of 
disadvantaged and vulnerable 
groups through livelihood and 
living condition improvements

Enhancing people’s lives and 
the value of the city’s economy 
through establishing and 
improving the effectiveness of 
key agricultural product value 
chains

CONSULTATION MEETINGS WITH RELATED STAKEHOLDERS
Vũ Cảnh Toàn © ISET-International. 2017

In Phase II of the project, the city expanded the 
working groups and mobilized new partners and 
resources to support answering key questions, and 
applied systems thinking to address its resilience 
challenges. One of the important results of Phase 
II is the list of initiatives and priority actions 
for implementation. 

Phase I & II results provide an important basis to 
develop the resilience strategy for Cần Thơ City. 
This strategy is not a fixed document but needs 
to be updated regularly to stay attuned to future 

changes in the city as well as to catch up with 
results of the implementation process. 

Active participation of local stakeholders, 
including local government agencies, enterprises, 
communities, social organizations, associations, 
unions, research institutes and universities, 
throughout the process is a highlight of strategy 
development in Cần Thơ City. Specifically, the 
strategy development process received active 
support from the multi-disciplinary working group, 
which comprises of members from various city 
departments and agencies. This working group 

18

19

RESILIENCE APPROACH AND STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT  PROCESSCAN THRESILIENTFigure 3.
STRUCTURAL ORGANIZATION AND STAKEHOLDER COORDINATION IN THE STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT PROCESS 

and ward/commune level governments, related 
communities, research organizations, training 
agencies, and enterprises. Specifically, the 100RC 
project in Cần Thơ organized 55 consultation 
meetings, group discussion sessions, and in-depth 
interviews with nearly 700 people.

operates under the direction of an Advisory Board 
of 38 members, who are leaders of various city 
departments and agencies. In Phase II, these 
groups were divided into specialized working 
groups focusing on each of the identified discovery 
areas (see Figure 3). Members of the working 
groups participated throughout the strategy 
development process. Moreover, the city also 
engaged various local experts in the in-depth 
studies associated with discovery areas. In addition 
to members of the working groups, the Cần Thơ 
100 Resilient Cities Project Office (CRO Office) and 
the Institute for Social and Environmental Transition 
(ISET) actively engaged and consulted with 
other city stakeholders such as city departments 
and agencies, unions and associations, district 

20

© CRO Office in Cần Thơ

21

RESILIENCE APPROACH AND STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT  PROCESSCAN THRESILIENTOVERVIEW OF 
CẦN THƠ CITY 

22

23

OVERVIEW OF CẦN THƠ CITYCAN THRESILIENTCẦN THƠFigure 4.
HISTORY OF CẦN THƠ CITY’S ESTABLISHMENT AND DEVELOPMENT 

1739

1868

1876

1956

1962

1972

1975

1991

2003

2009

Appeared on official maps of Vietnam in the name of 
Trấn Giang
The French joined Phong Phú district (Trấn Giang – Cần Thơ) 
and Bãi Sào district (Sóc Trăng province) into a single district

Cần Thơ County with Cần Thơ as the chief town established

CẦN THƠ

Cần Thơ province renamed as Phong Dinh province 

Annexation of Thốt Nốt district (Long Xuyên province)

Became a city directly under the administration of the Southwestern region

Cần Thơ and Sóc Trăng merged together to become a new province named Hậu Giang

Splitting of the Hậu Giang province into two provinces Cần Thơ and Sóc Trăng

Cần Thơ province divided into Hậu Giang province and centrally-administered Cần Thơ City

Cần Thơ classified as a level 1 city under direct national administration

BRIEF HISTORY OF THE CITY

The land of Cần Thơ was known from the period the Cửu Long River Delta 
(Vietnamese part of the Mekong delta) area started to develop. However, it was not 
until the 18th century (1739) that this land appeared in official maps of Vietnam in the 
name of Trấn Giang. After many changes in administrative boundaries and name (see 
Figure 4), Cần Thơ City of today was officially established. Cần Thơ was classified as a 
level 1 city under direct national administration in 2009. 

Physical area : 1,401 km2   
Population in 2018: 1,283.161
Average population density: 877 people/km2 
Highest population density: 9,024 people/
km2 ở quận Ninh Kiều

Average annual precipitation: ~ 1700 mm 

Average annual temperature: about 27oC,  
increased by 0.7oC during the past 40 years 

Minimum temperature increased by about 
1.5oC during the past 40 years 

*Source: Cần Thơ-CTK 2017; UBND-CầnThơ 2018

*Source: UBND-CầnThơ 2014b

24

25

OVERVIEW OF CẦN THƠ CITYCAN THRESILIENTFigure 5.
CHANGES IN THE NUMBER OF DAYS ABOVE 35OC, PERIOD 1975-2015*

Figure 6.
LOCATION AND ADMINISTRATIVE MAP OF CẦN THƠ CITY*

Number of days > 35oC

Linear 
(number of days >35oC)

Year

*Source: CCCO-Cần Thơ 2016

NATURAL, ECONOMIC AND 
SOCIAL CONDITIONS
A typical Cửu Long river delta city, Cần Thơ is 
covered by a dense network of rivers, channels and 
canals with total length of 3,405 km, equivalent to 
2 km per km2 (UBND-CầnThơ 2010). This system of 
rivers, channels and canals play a major role in local 
people’s lives and the city’s economic activities. The 
city has low elevation, with most of its area lying at 
0.8-1.0 m above sea level1.

The city is divided into 9 districts, including 5 urban 
districts and 4 rural districts (see Figure 6). However, 
the districts with highest urban development and 
population density are the three central districts of 
Ninh Kiều, Bình Thủy and Cái Răng. 

1 

Based on the level recorded at the Hòn Dấu Station. 
Information is based on the digital elevation map by the 
Southern Institute for Water Resource Research – SIWRR 
(2009).

In Cần Thơ there are two seasons in a year: the rainy 
season from May to November, with most rain in 
October; and the dry season from December to 
April, with driest weather in February. However, 
the historical distinction between the seasons is 
becoming blurred and unpredictable as the climate 
shifts. Many major out-of-season rainfall events 
have occurred in the middle of the dry season 
in recent years, such as major rainfall events in 
February 2010 and 2017. 

Cần Thơ is considered the economic center and 
development engine for the entire region. During 
the past years, the economic growth rate of the 
city has always been above the country average. 
The city’s economic structure in 2018 is dominated 
by services (59% of Gross Regional Domestic 
Product – GRDP), industry and construction (33%) 
and agriculture/fisheries (8%). There is continued 
growth in industry (especially agricultural product 
processing) and high-tech large-scale agriculture. 
The combined size of the service and industry 

*Source: Google Earth and; 
 

According to the Plan to Respond to Climate Change of Cần Thơ period 2015-2030

Figure 7.
ECONOMIC STRUCTURE IN 2018*

AGRICULTURE/FISHERIES 

8.14%

SERVICES
59.61%

INDUSTRY AND 
CONSTRUCTION 

32.7%

*Source: UBND-Cần Thơ 2018

GDP in 2015 equivalent to 16.01% of 
GDP of the Cửu Long Delta 

GRDP growth rate averaged at 
7.25%/year in the 2011-2017 period 
(UBND-CầnThơ 2017).

GRDP in 2018 increased by 7.505% 
from 2017

GRDP per capita 80.48 million VND 
(UBND-CầnThơ 2018).

26

27

OVERVIEW OF CẦN THƠ CITYCAN THRESILIENTTechnology Center, research institutes (such as Cửu 
Long River Rice Research Institute and Cửu Long 
River Delta Research and Development Institute, 
and Research Institute for Climate Change). 

© Phạm Anh Khoa

sectors is projected to reach 98% of the city 
economy by 2030. (GoV 2013a).

Cần Thơ City has the most well-developed and 
modern infrastructure system in the Cửu Long 
River Delta region. Some of the most notable 
infrastructure include Can Tho International 
Airport, Cái Cui Port which can receive 20,000-
DWT vessels, and Ô Môn Electricity Generating 
Station with capacity of 2,800 MW. The city is also 
the center for education and research of the Cửu 
Long delta region with a collection of well-known 
universities such as Can Tho University, Can Tho 
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Software 

Lê Thị Nguyệt Linh © Cần Thơ Department of Culture, Sports and Tourism

28

29

OVERVIEW OF CẦN THƠ CITYCAN THRESILIENTCẦN THƠ 
IN THE FUTURE

The future Cần Thơ City will be shaped by a number of major strategies and 
plans, including:

Master plan of Cần Thơ City until 2030 
with vision to 2050

Socio-economic Development Plan 
until 2020 with vision to 2030

Resolution 120 by the National 
Government on sustainable 
development of the Cửu Long Delta for 
climate change adaptation

The regional plan of the Cửu Long 
Delta and the master plan of Cần Thơ 
City will be developed in accordance 
with the new Planning Law approved 
in 2017

30

Nguyễn Thơ © ISET-International

31

OVERVIEW OF CẦN THƠ CITYCAN THRESILIENTAccording to existing plans, in the future, 
Cần Thơ will be directed towards becoming 
a developed city with inter-connected 
and modern infrastructure and linkages 
to Southeast Asia, and the central growth 
engine of the Cửu Long River Delta. The 
city strives to become a hub for tourism, 
trade and goods distribution, ecological 
and high-tech urban agriculture. Regarding 
spatial planning, the city will be developed 
in an integrated, balanced, sustainable 
manner, in harmony with natural landscapes, 
and highlighting the identity of a river 
city, which is a typical ecological feature 
of the Cửu Long River Delta. In terms of 
urban expansion, the city emphasizes the 
principle of taking full advantage of the 
natural terrain, preserving existing rivers 
and channels, at the same time creating 
new lakes, ponds and canals to improve 
drainage and urban landscape. These targets 
are consistent with Resolution 120 of the 
Government of Vietnam. Related to future 
socio-economic targets, box 1 presents some 
official targets for Cần Thơ development 
by 2030. These targets form the basis for 
sectoral planning and public investment. 

BOX 1. SOME HIGHLIGHTS OF CẦN THƠ CITY IN THE FUTURE (GOV 2013B)

POPULATION: By 2030: about 1.9-2.0 million people, in which urban population is about 
1.5-1.6 million

URBANIZATION RATE about 75-80%

Targeted average annual economic growth rate 10.5%/year in the 2021 – 2030 period

Average income per capita by 2030: 14,200 USD.

Percentage of rural population with connected clean water supply by 2020: 80-85%

Percentage of waste collected and treated by 2020: 100%.

Percentage of wastewater treated by 2020: 70-80%.

Major infrastructure: developing the existing Cần Thơ International Airport, planning a 
regional international airport after 2030 in Cờ Đỏ district; building railway infrastructure for 
Hồ Chí Minh - Cần Thơ and Cần Thơ - Châu Đốc routes; Cái Cui International Port; building or 
expanding the 16 water plants to supply water for the entire city at total capacity of 427,500 
m3/day by 2030 and 01 regional level water plant - Sông Hậu 1 water plant with the capacity of 
500,000 m3/day.

(The above information was taken from the Master Plan of Cần Thơ City until 2030 with vision 
to 2050. These are the targets set by the city. However, the realized results in the future might be 
different from these targets.)

Nguyễn Thơ © ISET-International

32

33

OVERVIEW OF CẦN THƠ CITYCAN THRESILIENTCITY RESILIENCE 
CHALLENGES   

34

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2014

35

CITY RESILIENCE CHALLENGESCAN THRESILIENTSHOCKS  
& STRESSES 

According to the 100RC’s Phase I and II results, 
Cần Thơ has been affected by various types of 
shocks and stresses (see Figure 9 and Figure 10), 
of which those requiring special attention include 
flooding, riverbank erosion, pollution, poverty, 
unemployment, unstable markets and export 
prices, legal and technical barriers of international 
markets, and aging infrastructure. These shocks and 

stresses also interact, becoming more and more 
complicated, dangerous and unpredictable.

In the future, challenges related to flooding, 
pollution, extreme heatwaves, water scarcity, 
disease outbreaks (in humans and livestock), 
land subsidence, lack of public green and blue 
space, extraction and use of water in upstream 
areas, and changes in global and regional markets 
are considered potentially dangerous shocks 

and stresses for Cần Thơ City. In addition, while 
problems such as water shortage, saline intrusion 
2 have not caused major damages in the 
and storms1
city yet, the intensity and frequency of these events 
may increase and threaten Cần Thơ City in future. 

2  According to the assessment of the Ministry of Natural 

Resources and Environment (MONRE), storms are shifting 
more southwards (MONRE, 2016).

SHOCKS

Figure 9.
SHOCKS AFFECTING CẦN THƠ CITY

Figure 10.
STRESSES AFFECTING CẦN THƠ CITY

STRESSES

EXTREME RAINFALL
Present threat and tends to grow in intensity, 
difficult to predict due to climate change. 
Average daily maximum rainfall in the southern 
region might increase by 10-70% by the middle 
of the century (scenario RCP4.5 and RCP8.5) 
(MONRE 2016).

ENVIRONMENTAL INCIDENT
Present threat which tends to grow in 
severity due to urban development, industrial 
development and water scarcity

EROSION
Present threat which tends to grow in severity

SALINE INTRUSION
Has happened before but at low level and low 
frequency. Might increase in the future due to 
impacts of sea level rise and climate change. 

STORM
Has not happened but is a likely future threat. 
According to statistics, tropical depression 
and typhoon tracks are shifting southwards 
(MONRE 2016).

EXTREME HEATWAVE
Has happened and tends to increase in intensity 
and frequency. Number of days with average 
temperature of 35oC or above might increase 
by about 20 days in the Southern region by the 
middle of the century according to scenario 
RCP4.5 (MONRE 2016).

36

FLOODING
Is a dangerous shock, which is becoming more 
severe due to concurrent impacts of extreme 
rainfall, high tides, river floods, the impacts of 
hydropower reservoirs upstream of the Mekong, 
land subsidence, climate change, etc. 

INFRASTRUCTURE FAILURE
There have not been major infrastructure failures 
but they might become more threatening in the 
future unless there are precautionary measures 
for extreme situations. 

HIGH TIDE
Present threat which tends to grow in severity 

POVERTY
Ongoing issue which is declining thanks to 
support policies of the city and economic growth. 

LAND SUBSIDENCE
Current problem, and might worsen in the future 
due to the impacts of groundwater extraction and 
urbanization, etc. Limited data on this issue. 

AGING INFRASTRUCTURE 
A current problem but the city is implementing 
various urban infrastructure upgrading 
programs and projects.

REDUCTION OF GREEN AND BLUE 
SPACE
Existing problem, could worsen due to urban 
development. 

WATER SCARCITY
Currently not a serious issue but might become 
one in the future due to the impacts of climate 
change, upstream water management, saline 
intrusion, etc.

INCREASING CRIME AND VIOLENCE 
Some evidence for this but the problems are not 
serious and the city has made many efforts to 
address them.

MIGRATION 
Current stress and tends to grow in magnitude as 
Cần Thơ is the center of the densely-populated Cửu 
Long River Delta. 

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
Ongoing issue which might increase in the future 
due to population growth, urban development, 
industrial development and water scarcity. 

ECONOMIC RECESSION
Has happened before and might become more 
severe in the future as the economy becomes 
more dependent on external markets 

UNSTABLE EXPORT MARKET AND 
PRICES
Ongoing issue which might worsen in the future. 
However, the city has been making efforts to 
build capacity to respond to these situations. 

UNEMPLOYMENT
Ongoing issue which might increase with 
economic shocks in the future

LEGAL AND TECHNICAL BARRIERS 
OF EXPORT MARKETS
Ongoing issue which might worsen in the future. 
However, the city has been making efforts to 
build capacity to respond to these situations.

37

CITY RESILIENCE CHALLENGESCAN THRESILIENTFigure 11.
IMPACTS OF HYDROPOWER DAMS IN THE MEKONG ON CẦN THƠ*

*Source of map of dams on the Mekong: Hydropower dams 
are killing the Mekong: http://news.zing.vn/dap-thuy-dien-
dang-giet-dong-mekong-post634722.html

With a chain of hydropower dams constructed, 
in construction or planned upstream of the 
Mekong River (as of 2014) (UBND-CầnThơ 2014a), 
the issues of droughts, water scarcity (in the dry 
season) and flooding (in the rainy season) in Cần 
Thơ will be increasingly sensitive to upstream dam 
and reservoir management practices over which 
Vietnam has no control . Dam operation can also 
reduce the amount of alluvial silt essential for 
agriculture production, impact fisheries, and affect 
water pollution and saline intrusion.

© CRO Office in Cần Thơ

BOX 2.  THE IMPACTS OF FLOODING AND INUNDATION ON CẦN THƠ CITY 

The heavy rainfall even on Oct 05, 2009 caused serious flooding in the city, with flood depth up 
to 1 m in some streets such as Mậu Thân and Lý Thường Kiệt.

In 2011 in Ninh Kiều district, there were 22 rainfall related inundation locations and 56 high tide 
related inundation locations (with tidal peak at 2.15 m), and 43 locations with inundation caused 
by a combination of heavy rainfall and high tide (80 mm rainfall and 1.87 m tidal peak).

A record tidal peak (from 2.20–2.25 m) in Oct 2018 inundated 62/63 streets in Ninh Kiều District, 
with flood depth in many streets as high as 0.6 m. In the central city area, there were 107 
inundated locations, with water level recorded at 0.1–0.65 m from the road surface and flood 
duration from 2–4 hours.  

(Source: Cần Thơ Hydrometeorological Station and Action Plan to Respond to Climate Chante in Cần 
City period 2015-2030) )

38

39

CITY RESILIENCE CHALLENGESCAN THRESILIENTOVERVIEW OF THE RESILIENCE 
OF CẦN THƠ CITY

During the past years, Cần Thơ City has made good progress towards 
fulfilling many resilience objectives. For example, in the area of 
Health and Well-being, the proportion of households with incomes 
below the official poverty line has dropped to only 1.53% at the end 
of 2018. Access to jobs and basic services such as electricity, water, 
education and health care has been improved consistently. The city 
has supported thousands of poor households through subsidies for 
housing, health insurance, electricity, and often organizes vocational 
training classes, or provides other support to households in hardship 
to enable them to find employment. 

Regarding infrastructure, during the past 15 years (2004-2018), Cần 
Thơ City has implemented many projects to improve the quality of 
the city’s infrastructure systems. Major and notable projects include 
the urban upgrade project of the Mekong Delta region, and the Cần 
Thơ Urban Development and Resilience Project. These projects are 
building, upgrading and expanding hundreds of alleys, roads, bridges 
and schools at the city center area; upgrading major river channels 
such as Tham Tướng, Cái Khế, Chùa; upgrading Bún Xáng Lake and 
Lưu Hữu Phước Park; revamping and improving the water drainage 
and dyke systems to ensure protection of the core urban area of the 
city against flooding impacts. The city has also been implementing 
various projects to improve environmental quality such as building a 
combined waste treatment and electricity generation plant, and water 
drainage and wastewater treatment facilities in Cái Răng district. 

Regarding Society and Economy, Cần Thơ is the province with most 
stable and robust economy in the Cửu Long River Delta. It is regarded 
as the economic center and driver of the entire region. During the 
five years leading to 2017, the city’s economic growth rate (based on 
GRDP) averaged 7.25%/year (UBND-CầnThơ 2017).

Despite its many achievements, Cần Thơ’s economy still has many 
limitations and is facing multiple challenges. These limitations and 
challenges are summarized below according to the four dimensions of 
the CRF.

 

40

© CRO Office in Cần Thơ

Lê Thị Nguyệt Linh © Cần Thơ Department of Culture, 
Sports and Tourism

41

CITY RESILIENCE CHALLENGESCAN THRESILIENTy

g

adership and Str a t e
1

e
     L

 
 
 
 

Under the resilience lens, Leadership and Strategy areas of the city still 
have some limitations in the following aspects: integrated cross-sectoral 
planning process; effectiveness in the implementation of policies and 
plans; needed capacity to support integrated planning and policy 
making; stakeholder participation.

LIMITATIONS AND CHALLENGES

STRATEGY, 
POLICY AND PLAN 
DEVELOPMENT 
PROCESS 

•  Mostly follows a top-down approach, which makes it difficult to achieve 

diverse local outcomes.

•  Planning driven by targets rather than assessing needs and available 

resources for implementation, or the local impacts of shocks and stresses at 
the regional and global scales.

•  Plans for individual sectors lack integration and cohesion, thus are 

overlapping or even conflicting. 

•  Plans are poorly linked to implementation mechanisms. 

•  The city lacks a mechanism/structure for integrated cross-sectoral 

coordination. No agency is responsible for resilience building.

CAPACITY TO 
SUPPORT PLANNING 
AND POLICY-
MAKING

•  The capacity to make projections is very limited. 

•  The capacity to assess impacts of a sector/field’s plan on other sectors/

fields is limited. According to experts, the implementation of existing urban 
development and land use plans might cause the flood depth and flood 
footprint in Cần Thơ to increase by as much as 18%.

•  The capacity and awareness of city departments/ agencies and local people 

to anticipate and respond to extreme events is limited.

STAKEHOLDER 
PARTICIPATION 
AND 
COORDINATION

•  The participation of local people and city departments and agencies is not 

substantial. Communities are notified of decisions but seldom consulted.

•  The coordination among departments and agencies is limited. The city has 
no mechanism for the development and implementation of cross-sectoral 
plans.

© CCCO Cần Thơ

BOX 3.  EXAMPLES OF LIMITATIONS RELATED TO STAKEHOLDER PARTICIPATION AND 
COORDINATION 

Residents displaced by urban development projects are entitled to livelihood and training 
support through resettlement programs, but the Department of Labor, War Invalids and 
Social Affairs (DOLISA), despite being a lead government agent in this area, is not playing 
an active role. According to Ninh Kiều district DOLISA and city Job Service Center (JSC), 
they have not had substantial collaboration with any urban infrastructure development 
project to provide training, or livelihood and job seeking support to affected households. 

Urban flood management needs to be carried out using cross-sectoral approach as it 
is affected by many factors. However, this is still being managed separately by multiple 
actors such as Department of Agriculture and Rural Development  (DARD), Department of 
Natural Resources and Environment (DONRE) and Department of Construction (DOC).

42

43

CITY RESILIENCE CHALLENGESCAN THRESILIENT234            Sức khỏe và Phúc lợi                 Kinh tế và Xã hội                 Hạ tầng và Môi trườngUnder the resilience lens, key Infrastructure and Environment limitations 
and challenges of Cần Thơ City concern the issues of: capacity to 
respond to extreme events; database; decreasing green and blue space 
coverage; increasing impacts of flooding; poorly-connected transport 
system, and poor quality public transport system; solid waste and 
wastewater management; water security; and energy. 

 
 

 

 

 

I

n

f

r

a

s

t

r

u

c
t

2
d Environment

u
r

e a
n

LIMITATIONS AND CHALLENGES

RESPONDING TO 
EXTREME EVENTS 

•  Limited consideration of extreme events in designing and constructing urban 

infrastructure system.  

•  Mostly depend on hard infrastructure measures, which lack flexibility 

and redundancy.

DECREASED 
GREEN AREA 
AND WATER 
SURFACE DUE TO 
URBANIZATION 

•  From 1990 to 2018, total green area in Cần Thơ City decreased by 22,845 ha. 

•  Total length of the river and channel system in Cần Thơ has been cut 

dramatically during the past 20 years, especially in the inner city area (Ninh Kiều 
district lost more than 94 km, and Cái Răng district almost 116 km).

•  As a result, natural water storage and drainage capacity has declined 

significantly. 

INCREASING 
SOLID 
WASTE AND 
WASTEWATER 

•  The amount of domestic solid waste generated is about 930 tons/day (2016) 
and expected to reach 2,000 tons/day in 2030 (VIAP-SIUP 2013). However, the 
city’s waste and wastewater treatment capacity is still very limited despite 
considerable efforts. 

•  The management and monitoring of disposal that causes pollution are still poor. 

•  It is still very common that people dispose waste and wastewater directly to 

roads and especially ponds, lakes, and channels. 

MANAGEMENT 

•  No systematic spatial database. Data are inconsistent in format, structure, 

geographical referencing, and not inter-connected. Most spatial data are in 
AutoCad format, which is difficult to synthesize and analyze. Information and 
data are mostly managed by sector.  

•  Lack of integrated database management system and information sharing 

mechanism. 

•  The operation and maintenance of infrastructure, especially the drainage 

system, is very limited.

44

© CRO Office in Cần Thơ

WATER SECURITY

•  The future water resources in Cần Thơ might be heavily affected by many factors 

such as saline intrusion, pollution, groundwater depletion, etc.

•  Cần Thơ’s water leakage rate is still quite high (about 25%).

ENERGY AND 
INFRASTRUCTURE 

•  Electricity demand increased by 14% in the 2011-2015 period. However, energy 

in Can Tho is mostly fossil fuel sourced, although solar energy in Cần Thơ can 
satisfy from 46-70% (or even more) of the city’s electricity demand  
(Green-ID 2018).  

 

•  The road transport system lacks compatibility and connectivity. The public 

transport system is in poor condition with regards to both infrastructure and 
service quality. 

•  The water drainage system also lacks compatibility and connectivity.

Figure 12.
 LOST OF GREEN SPACES IN THREE INNER CITY DISTRICTS FROM 1965 TO 2017*

*According to Phase II re-
search result of the 100RC 
program in Cần Thơ

45

CITY RESILIENCE CHALLENGESCAN THRESILIENT134            Sức khỏe và Phúc lợi                 Kinh tế và Xã hội   Chiến lược, chính sách và cơ chế  phối hợpUnder the resilience lens, the city’s Economy and Society areas still have 
some limitations regarding: the planning process; linkages between 
actors in value chains; diversification of key agriculture products; tariff 
and technical barriers of export markets; post-harvest processing; and 
regional connectivity.

3

          E c o

 

n o m y and society

LIMITATIONS AND CHALLENGES

ECONOMIC 
PLANNING  

•  The ability to make projections is limited. Plans are highly sector-based, often lack 

integration and cohesion, thus are overlapping, even conflicting. 

VALUE CHAIN OF 
KEY AGRICULTURE 
PRODUCTS 

•  Socio-economic objectives are often set without assessment of the actual needs 

or potential impacts of shocks and stresses. 

•  The assessment of market demand and supply is still limited.

•  Economic planning process has not fully considered regional drivers and regional 

connectivity. Economic cooperation between provinces is spontaneous and 
limited to information exchange.

•  Agriculture production and processing are mostly output-driven. 

•  The linkage between stakeholders (such as producers and traders, processing 
enterprises, exporters and government management agencies) in agriculture 
value chains in general and the value chains of catfish and baccaurea* in 
particular are still weak.

•  Contract enforcement is weak and cannot ensure stakeholder accountability and 

commitment in value chains.

•  The ability to respond to shocks and stresses, especially extreme events and 

abnormal circumstances in production and trading is still limited.

* In-depth studies about these 2 value chains were conducted during phase II of the 100RC project in Cần Thơ 

MARKETS AND 
EXPORTING OF 
KEY AGRICULTURE 
PRODUCTS 

•  The ability of exporters to respond to price fluctuations, high legal and technical 

requirements of importing countries is limited. 

•  The markets for some agricultural products are small due to limitations in brand 

name development and product promotion. 

•  Agriculture products lack diversity. 

•  Lack of proper assessment of market needs, demand, characteristics 

and preferences.

46

Lê Thị Nguyệt Linh © Cần Thơ 
Department of Culture, Sports and 
Tourism

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2014

© Phạm Anh Khoa

© CRO Office in Cần Thơ

47

CITY RESILIENCE CHALLENGESCAN THRESILIENT124            Sức khỏe và Phúc lợi   Chiến lược, chính sách và cơ chế  phối hợp                 Hạ tầng và Môi trường         Health and w
4

e

ll-

b

e

i

n

g

Under the resilience lens, Health and Well-being supports provided by 
the city are still limited with regards to: quality of vocational training, 
livelihood improving and employment support, and post-training job 
support; livelihood support to communities following a shock; and 
responsive / backup plans for electricity, water, and health care under 
abnormal situations. 

LIMITATIONS AND CHALLENGES

JOB AND INCOME  

•  Supports are ad hoc and not strategic or long-term enough. 

•  Supports are not really based on labors’ expectations, livelihood characteristics, 

age, health, gender, production and business conditions, or the market’s 
characteristics and demand.

•  Consultation before and after delivery of vocational training is not effective. 

•  Provision of business skills and support for market access are limited. 

MANAGEMENT 

•  Lack of synchronized, comprehensive and updated database on disadvantaged 
and vulnerability groups. Data are housed separately by different departments 
and are not well-linked.

•  The evaluation of support effectiveness focuses mostly on number of 

beneficiaries but does not assess the long-term impacts or sustainability 
of policies.

•  The city has not identified the group of people who tend to rely on 

the government’s support and are not proactive enough in improving 
their livelihood. 

MIGRATION 

•  The inflow of migrants into Cần Thơ tends to increase. This group of residents 

create certain pressure on the urban infrastructure. Besides, these people, 
especially the informal migrants, are often the vulnerable. However, they face 
many difficulties in accessing basic social services. The city does not have official 
records of informal migrant groups and offers little support to them. 

RESPONDING 
TO SHOCKS AND 
STRESSES 

•  People do not have back-up electricity and clean water supply in case a serious 

disruption happens.

•  Support policies and programs do not consider extreme events (such as 

consideration of extreme storms or flooding, plans for cases of unemployment, 
business loss due to price drops, etc.).  

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2014

© CRO Office in Cần Thơ

INTERVIEW MR. SON ON THE IMPACT OF 
RESETTLEMENT ON HIS JOB/LIVELIHOOD, 
AN BÌNH, CẦN THƠ
© CRO Office - 100RC

© CRO Office in Cần Thơ

48

49

CITY RESILIENCE CHALLENGESCAN THRESILIENT123                 Kinh tế và Xã hội   Chiến lược, chính sách và cơ chế  phối hợp                 Hạ tầng và Môi trườngCẦN THƠ 
RESILIENCE 
STRATEGY  

“

a green, sustainable, proactive and 
integrated river city where people enjoy 
prosperity and safety from shocks and 
stresses, and no one is left behind.”

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2014

50

51

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTA green, sustainable, proactive and integrated river 
city where people enjoy prosperity and safety from 
shocks and stresses, and no one is left behind.

VISION 
& GOAL

Based on the orientations and vision of the Master 
Socio-Economic Development Plan of Cần Thơ 
City until 2020 with vision to 2030, and the Spatial 
Master Plan of Cần Thơ City until 2030 with vision to 
2050, and based on the results of Phase I and Phase 
II of the 100RC program, the vision of Cần Thơ City 
up to 2030 is identified as: 

This vision is specified with four goals, corresponding to four dimensions of the CRF.

VISION

1. Leadership and 
Strategy
Policies and plans 
are developed and 
implemented in a 
systematic, integrated 
manner, with active 
participation of all 
relevant stakeholders. 

2. Infrastructure 
and Environment 
A green and 
sustainable river city 
with an infrastructure 
system that is well-
connected, modern, 
flexible, diverse, 
resilient to extreme 
natural hazards.

3. Economy      
and Society
A knowledge 
economy that is 
proactive, diverse 
and deeply-
integrated, while 
remaining steady 
when facing regional 
and global economy 
fluctuations.

4. Health and  
Well-being
Communities have 
secured and stable 
income, and live in 
a green and clean 
environment, safe 
from the impacts of 
economic, social and 
environmental shocks 
and stresses.

RESILIENCE ACTIONS 

Lê Thị Nguyệt Linh © Cần Thơ Department of Culture, Sports and Tourism

52

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2016

53

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENT1234RESILIENCE ACTIONS 

feasibility is one of the most important criteria in 
the assessment and selection of actions.

Proposed actions are organized into four goals, 
corresponding to four dimensions of the CRF. 
The list of resilience actions needs to be updated 
regularly. The timeframe of these actions is until 
2030, with some actions to be implemented 
immediately. The other actions will be 
implemented later depending on city budget and 
mobilization of finances.

To respond to shocks and stresses and address 
resilience challenges, Cần Thơ City has been 
implementing many different programs and 
projects (See Appendix 2). Actions proposed under 
this strategy do not cover all areas and issues of the 
city, but only focus on specific priority areas and 
issues from a resilience perspective.

Actions proposed in this strategy are identified 
based on results of Phase I & II of the 100RC 
program in Cần Thơ, as well as recommendations 
and results of various consultative meetings with 
city departments, agencies, social organizations, 
associations, experts and local communities. 
Moreover, to ensure feasibility of the strategy, 
beside other criteria (such as consistency with city 
priority, linkage to challenges the city is facing), 

 

R
E
S
I
L
I
E
N
C
E
C
H
A
L
L
E
N
G
E
S

VISION

GOALS

RESILIENCE ACTIONS

P
O
L
I

 

 

C
Y
A
N
D
P
L
A
N
A
N
A
L
Y
S
I
S

 

 

 

S
T
A
K
E
H
O
L
D
E
R
C
O
N
S
U
L
T
A
T
I
O
N

LEGEND

Related Resilience Goals

Qualities of resilience

Scale

Strategies, policies 

Coordination mechanisms

Infrastructure 

Environment

Economy 

Society

Health

Well-being

Reflective

Resourceful 

Robust 

Redundant

Flexible

Inclusive

Integrated

Individual/community

District

City

54

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2014

55

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENT1

Direction

LEADERSHIP 
AND STRATEGY

GOAL
Policies and plans are developed and implemented in a 
systemic, integrated manner, with active participation of all 
relevant stakeholders. 

ACTIONS OVERVIEW

PLAN AND POLICY DEVELOPMENT 
1.1 Build capacity for city departments to undertake integrated and systemic planning, consistent 
with the new Planning Law.
Timeframe: 2020 - 2025
1.2 Review and analyze key plans and policies of the city and make recommendations to ensure 
they are consistent, systemic and integrated.  
Timeframe: 2020 - 2025

PLAN AND POLICY IMPLEMENTATION 
1.3 Improve the effectiveness of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the implementation of city 
plans.  
Timeframe: 2022 - 2025
1.4 Enhance the capacity for coordinating and monitoring the implementation of Cần Thơ City 
Resilience Strategy.
Timeframe: 2019 - 2021

COORDINATION AND STAKEHOLDER PARTICIPATION
1.5 Establish a flood management office and develop an integrated flood coordination and 
management mechanism for Cần Thơ City.
Timeframe: 2019 - 2021
1.6  Engage communities in actions to build resilience in Cần Thơ City.
Timeframe: 2019 - 2025
1.7  Engage with and raise awareness of resilience and sustainable development among high 
school students in Cần Thơ City.
Timeframe: 2020 - 2025

56

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2016

57

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTPLAN AND POLICY DEVELOPMENT 

Action 1.1
Build capacity for city departments to undertake integrated and systemic planning, consistent with the 
new Planning Law.

The main objective of this 
proposal is to organize training 
courses, providing technical 
instructions on methods and 
tools to support integrated and 
cross-sectoral planning and 
methods to analyze and assess 
the impacts shocks and stresses 
have on the city’s development 
objectives; and assess the 
positive and negative impacts 
of sectoral plans on other 
sectors or plans.

Project lead

DPI

Supporting partners

DOC, DONRE, DARD, DOF, DOIT, CRO Office 

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

Funding sources

New proposal

2020 – 2025

City and national budgets, international 
donors

Related actions

1.2; 1.4; 3.4; 3.5; 3.10; 3.11; 3.12

Resilience qualities

DETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIONS

Action 1.2
Review and analyze key plans and policies of the city and make recommendations to ensure they are 
consistent, systemic and integrated.

The purpose of this action 
is to identify any limitations, 
gaps, overlaps or conflicts in 
existing plans of the city, and 
to introduce modifications 
as needed to improve these 
policies and plans. The analysis 
will be based on system 
theories and the CRF.
The result of this action will 
provide important inputs 
for Cần Thơ in the process 
of implementing the new 
Planning Law.

Project lead

DPI

Supporting partners

DOC, DONRE, DARD, DOF, DOIC, CRO Office, 
ISET

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

Funding sources

New proposal

2020 – 2025

City and national budgets, international 
donors

Related actions

1.1; 1.3; 1.4; 3.4; 3.5; 3.10; 3.11; 3.12

Resilience qualities

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International

© CRO Office in Cần Thơ

58

59

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTPLAN AND POLICY IMPLEMENTATION 

COORDINATION AND STAKEHOLDER PARTICIPATION

DETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIONS

Action 1.3
Improve the effectiveness of monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of city plans.

Although the city already has 
regulations on monitoring and 
evaluation, the effectiveness 
of these policies and practices 
is still limited. To address the 
limitations, the city will develop 
a rigorous M&E mechanism, 
specifying indicators to assess 
the achievements of objectives, 
methods of evaluation, the roles 
and responsibilities of agencies, 
as well as requirements for 
identifying and sharing lessons 
from the evaluation.

Project lead

DPI

Supporting partners

City People’s Council Office, city  departments, 
CRO Office. 

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

New proposal

2022 – 2025

Funding sources

City and national budgets

Related actions

1.1; 1.4; 4.8

Resilience qualities

Action 1.4
Enhance the capacity for coordinating and monitoring the implementation of Cần Thơ City Resilience 
Strategy.

The purpose of this action 
is to build and strengthen 
the capacity of the city in 
general and of the CRO Office 
in particular in developing 
project proposals, coordinating 
the implementation of the 
CRS,  mobilize stakeholder 
participation, and monitor and 
evaluate resilience building 
actions.

Project lead

CRO Office

Supporting partners

DOC, DPI, DOLISA, DARD, DOIC, Climate 
Change Coordination Office (CCCO), CTU, ISET

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

New proposal

2019 – 2021

Funding sources

City budget, international donors

Related actions

1.1; 1.3; 3.2; 3.3; 4.3; 4.8

Resilience qualities

60

Action 1.5
Establish a flood management office and develop an integrated flood coordination and management 
mechanism for Cần Thơ City.

The flood management 
office is to be established 
under the project Cần Thơ 
Urban Development and 
Resilience Project funded 
by the World Bank (WB). The 
office will be responsible for 
cross-sectoral coordination of 
flood management activities; 
operating the information 
system on flood risk 
management; and supporting 
city leadership, departments 
and communities in 
responding to floods. 

Project lead

DOC

Supporting partners

ODA Project Management Unit (PMU) of Cần Thơ 
City, DONRE, DARD, DOIC, CRO Office

Scale 

Status

New proposal

Timeframe

Funding sources

2019 – 2021 (to be implemented)
ODA funds from the World Bank (WB) and Swiss State 
Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) (approved)

Related actions

1.1; 1.3; 1.4; 2.2; 2.3; 2.4; 2.5; 2.7; 2.12; 2.13; 2.14; 4.8

Resilience qualities

© Văn Phòng CCCO Cần Thơ

61

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTDETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIONS

Action 1.6
Engage communities in actions to build resilience in Cần Thơ City.

This action focuses on 
mobilizing the participation of 
communities in activities such 
as: monitoring the infilling of 
natural drainage channels, 
community level waste 
management and protecting 
green areas, etc. The tactical 
urbanism approach will be 
applied to help mobilize 
community participation. This 
action will be prioritized for 
implementation in vulnerable 
areas in inner city districts. 

Project lead

CRO office

Supporting partners

PC and mass organizations at ward/commune 
level, Cần Thơ University student Association, 
Cần Thơ University

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

New proposal

2019-2025

Funding sources

City budget and donors

Related actions

1.4; 1.7; 4.1; 4.4

Resilience qualities

Action 1.7
Engage with and raise awareness of resilience and sustainable development among high school 
students in Cần Thơ City.

This action will focus on 
developing communication 
materials on shocks and 
stresses in Cần Thơ City and 
related actions for students 
to participate in; organizing 
activities to build knowledge 
among school students; and 
mobilizing the participation of 
students in pilot activities, such 
as planting trees, saving water, 
saying no to plastic waste, etc.  

Project lead

CRO Office

Supporting partners

Department of Education and Training 
(DOET), DOIC, district level DOET, and high 
schools in the city, CTU, Bending Bamboo

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

High schools in the city

New proposal

2020 – 2025 

Funding sources

City budget and donors

Related actions

1.4; 1.6; 2.1 

Resilience qualities

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2015

© CRO Office in Cần Thơ

62

63

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENT2

Direction

INFRASTRUCTURE 
& ENVIRONMENT

GOAL
A green and sustainable river city with an infrastructure system that 
is well-connected, modern, flexible, diverse and resilient to extreme 
natural hazards.

ACTIONS OVERVIEW

PROTECT NATURAL GREEN AND BLUE SPACES
2.1 Survey, identify and recover encroached and infilled channels and canals. Strengthen the monitoring 
and surveillance of any encroachment, infill and waste disposal in channels and canals with community 
participation.
Timeframe: 2020 – 2022
2.2 Conduct research to propose revision and addition to regulations to protect green and blue areas and 
mechanisms to implement these measures.
Timeframe: 2020 - 2025
BUILD RESILIENCE WITH GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE MEASURES
2.3 Assess the benefits of green infrastructure measures in Cần Thơ City.
Timeframe: 2019-2021
2.4 Pilot green infrastructure approach and measures to design and build a public park along Ngỗng 
Channel, Thới Nhựt resettlement area in An Khánh Ward (pilot project).
Timeframe: 2019-2021
2.5 Pilot rain water harvesting and increase permeable surface at An Khánh Secondary School (pilot project).
Timeframe: 2019-2021
2.6 Develop guideline documents and tools to support the application of green infrastructure measures in 
Cần Thơ City.
Timeframe: 2021-2023
2.7 Develop a master green infrastructure plan for core urban districts of Cần Thơ City (Ninh Kiều, Bình Thủy, 
Cái Răng).
Timeframe: 2023-2025
WATER SECURITY, WATER AND ENERGY SUPPLY 
2.8 Towards Climate Resilient Water Supply in the Southwestern Mekong Delta.
Timeframe: 2017-2021
2.9 Assess potential changes in water resources quality and availability in Cần Thơ in the future (until 2030 
and 2040), causes of these changes and their impacts on the city.
Timeframe: 2023-2025
2.10 Conduct research on solar energy development strategy and plans, and mechanisms to attract 
investment for solar energy development.
Timeframe: 2022-2024 
URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEM PLANNING AND DESIGN 
2.11 Conduct a study to improve the public transport system of Cần Thơ City.
Timeframe: 2019-2021
2.12 Assess land subsidence in Cần Thơ and develop a land subsidence monitoring system.
Timeframe: 2020-2023 
2.13 Develop well-connected and consistent GIS database on key urban infrastructure, and information 
management and user interface system to support the planning and management of urban infrastructure.
Timeframe: 2018-2025
2.14 Integrate the resilience approach into urban infrastructure design and development plans. Pilot 
applications for flood management plans and the design of flood protection infrastructure of the city. 
Timeframe: 2020-2030

64
© Huy Nguyễn

65

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTPROTECT NATURAL GREEN AND BLUE SPACES

Action 2.1
Survey, identify and recover encroached and infilled channels and canals. Strengthen the monitoring 
and surveillance of any encroachment, infill and waste disposal in channels and canals with community 
participation.

During the past 20 years, a large 
number of channels and canals in 
Cần Thơ City have been filled by 
residents, encroached by unauthorized 
construction, or blocked by waste, 
despite regulations restricting such 
practices. This causes pollution and 
has a major impact on the city’s water 
storage and drainage capacity. The 
city is aware of the problem, but not 
certain of the extent of such infill 
activity and the reasons for the failure 
of existing regulations. They also need 
to devise more effective solutions, in 
collaboration with communities, to 
prevent further encroachment and to 
recover as many illegal filled drainage 
channels as possible. This will include 
devising mechanisms to support 
community participation in monitoring 
and management of these channels.

Project lead

DOC (urban areas), DARD (rural areas)

Supporting partners

district People’s Committees (PC), 
DONRE, Youth Union, Women’s Union 
(WU), Fatherland’s Front, CRO Office, etc.

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

new proposal

2020-2022

Funding sources

City budget, donors 

Related actions

1.3; 2.1; 2.2; 2.6; 2.7

Resilience qualities

DETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIONS

Action 2.2
Conduct research to propose revision and addition to regulations to protect green and blue areas and 
mechanisms to implement these measures.

Green areas and water surface 
area in Cần Thơ City have been 
reduced considerably due to 
human interventions. This action 
focuses on revising and improving 
the enforcement of sanctions to 
control encroachment and infilling 
of natural water storage, drainage 
and infiltration areas. The city will 
explore mechanisms to encourage 
investment in green infrastructure. 
This action will contribute to 
improving temporary rainwater 
storage and infiltration capacity, and 
help improve air quality and reduce 
urban heat island effects.

Project lead

DOC

Supporting partners

DOF, DONRE, Institute of Construction 
Planning, district Division of Urban 
Management, CRO Office, Research Institute 
for Climate Change of CTU (Dragon Institute)

Scale 

Status

Proposal linked to existing efforts

Timeframe

2020-2025

Funding sources

City budget, donors

Related actions

1.3; 1.4; 1.6; 2.2; 3.1

Resilience qualities

© CRO Office in Cần Thơ

Nguyễn Thơ © ISET-International

66

67

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTBUILD RESILIENCE WITH GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE MEASURES 

Action 2.3
Assess the benefits of green infrastructure measures in Cần Thơ City.

This action focuses on the following 
activities: identify potential green 
infrastructure measures to apply in 
Cần Thơ City; assess the benefits of 
each set of measures in supporting 
flood management; assess and 
compare the costs of implementing 
and operating conventional flood 
control measures with green 
infrastructure measures; analyze 
the costs and benefits of various 
green infrastructure scenarios. The 
result of this research will provide 
important inputs to the development 
of the master green infrastructure 
development plan for Cần Thơ City. 
This project has received funding 
from Nafosted and the Newton Fund, 
and will commence in April 2019.

Project lead

CRO Office, Dragon Institute

Supporting partners

DOC, DONRE, Institute of Construction 
Planning, ISET, Hue University, Loughborough 
University, Stirling University

Scale 

Status

Approved new proposal 

Timeframe

2019-2021 (on going)

Funding sources

Newton Fund and Nafosted (approved)

Related actions

1.3; 2.1; 2.4; 2.6; 2.7

Resilience qualities

DETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIONS

Action 2.4
Pilot green infrastructure approach and measures to design and build a public park along Ngỗng 
Channel, Thới Nhựt resettlement area in An Khánh Ward. 

This action will apply a green 
infrastructure approach in designing 
and building the Rạch Ngỗng park 
in Thới Nhựt resettlement area, An 
Khánh Ward, Cần Thơ city. In addition 
to creating a public space and building 
community cohesion, this project is 
expected to contribute to rainwater 
infiltration and storage capacity and 
release pressure on the underground 
drainage system as well as to improve 
water and air quality in the surrounding 
area. Lessons and experience from 
this pilot will be documented and 
widely shared for model replication 
and promotion of green infrastructure 
measures and principles.

Project lead

Ninh Kiều district People’s Committee

Supporting partners

DOC, DONRE, Institute of Construction 
Planning, DARD, CRO, Dragon Institute

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

 Approved 

2019-2021 (in preparation for 
implementation)

Funding sources

City budget (approved)

Related actions

1.6; 2.2; 2.3; 2.6; 2.7

Resilience qualities

3D LAYOUT OF THE FUTURE RẠCH NGỖNG PARK

3D LAYOUT OF THE FUTURE RẠCH NGỖNG PARK

68

69

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTAction 2.5
Pilot rain water harvesting and increase permeable surface at An Khánh Secondary School 

Project lead

CRO Office

Supporting partners

An Khánh Secondary School, Ninh Kiều 
District DONRE, An Khánh PC, Dragon 
Institute

Scale 

Status

New proposal (pilot project)

Timeframe

2019-2021

Funding sources

donors

Related actions

1.6; 2.4; 2.6; 2.7

Resilience qualities

This action focuses on designing 
and installing a system to harvest 
rainwater from roofs of the school and 
renovating school gardens to improve 
their infiltration capacity. The acquired 
rainwater will be treated and used in 
bathrooms and for watering. This action 
contributes to reducing the pressure 
on the underground drainage system, 
saving water, and raising awareness. 
Lessons and experience from this 
project will be documented and widely 
shared for the replication of rain water 
harvesting at the household level as 
well as in public buildings (e.g. school, 
hospital, government buildings, etc.). 
The city is expected to mobilize the 
engagement and contribution of local 
communities and other stakeholders 
during the replication process.

Gutter

Roof

Rainwater collecting 

system

Waste Comber

Rainwater 

tank

Uses that do not require high 

water quality

DETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIONS

Action 2.6
Develop guideline documents and tools to support the application of green infrastructure measures in 
Cần Thơ City.

This action will produce guideline 
documents and tools for applying 
green infrastructure measures in 
Cần Thơ City at the community/
household level, in the design and 
construction of public buildings 
and spaces (parks, squares, 
sidewalks, etc.), and in new urban 
development and residential 
projects. These are expected to 
contribute to flood risk reduction, 
air quality improvement, energy 
savings and carbon sequestration. 
These guidelines and tools will 
be developed with reference 
to models that were applied 
successfully in other places in the 
world and based on the specific 
conditions of Cần Thơ. 

Project lead

DOC

Supporting partners

DONRE, Institute of Construction 
Planning, district Division of Urban 
Management, CRO Office, Dragon 
Institute, ISET, UN-Habitat Vietnam

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

new proposal

2021-2023

Funding sources

City budget, donors

Related actions

2.1; 2.2; 2.3; 2.4; 2.5; 2.7

Resilience qualities

Action 2.7
Developing a master green infrastructure plan for core urban districts of Cần Thơ City (Ninh Kiều, Bình 
Thủy, Cái Răng).

With the advantages of a river city, 
Cần Thơ has potential to develop 
green infrastructure for multiple 
objectives such as reducing flood, 
improving environmental quality 
(air and water), and creating public 
space for community activities. This 
action will include the following 
tasks: overall review and analysis 
of current land use, of existing 
drainage system and flood issues 
and the potential to apply green 
infrastructure measures in the city; 
analysis of green infrastructure 
options and benefits of each 
option; and development of a 
master green infrastructure plan for 
the city.

Project lead

DOC

DARD, DONRE, Institute for Construction 
Planning, estudioOCA Consultancy 
Company, ISET, Dragon Institute

New proposal

2023-2025

donors 

1.2; 1.4; 2.1; 2.2; 2.3; 2.4; 2.5; 2.6; 2.7; 3.11; 
3.5

Supporting partners

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

Funding sources

Related actions

Resilience qualities

70

71

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTWATER SECURITY, WATER AND ENERGY SUPPLY

Action 2.8
Towards Climate Resilient Water Supply in the Southwestern Mekong Delta

This is a project under the long-term 
cooperation program named WaterWorX and 
is co-funded by the Netherlands Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, Dutch and local water 
companies. The project period is from 2017 
until 2030, with three phases (this project is 
under phase 1). WaterWorX’s stated objective 
is to strengthen the capacity of local people to 
access clean water resources and/or sanitary 
facilities in a sustainable way. In Vietnam, Cần 
Thơ together with Sóc Trăng and Hậu Giang 
were selected to participate in this project. 
The project’s objective is to support water 
supply companies to: improve their capacity 
to organize and operate effectively; improve 
water supply system coverage; develop climate 
change adaptation plans for the water supply 
system until 2050; execute the Safe Water 
Supply project of the Mekong delta region; 
and seek funding for water supply and network 
expansion activities. This project is expected 
to help Cần Thơ and other provinces in the 
Mekong Delta to receive and implement the 
project Safe Water Supply for the Mekong delta 
funded by the World Bank

Project lead

Supporting 
partners

Scale 

Status

Cần Thơ Water Supply and 
Drainage Company (WASCCO)

DOC, DARD, Dragon Institute, 
Netherland’s water company Vitens 
Evides International

established and ongoing

Timeframe

2017-2021 

Funding sources

Netherlands Government 
(approved) 

Related actions

1.1; 1.2; 2.9; 2.13; 2.14

Resilience qualities

DETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIONS

Action 2.9
Assess potential changes in water resource quality and availability in Cần Thơ in the future (until 2030 
and 2040), causes of these changes and their impacts on the city.

This action focuses on the following 
activities:
•  Assess potential changes in future 

water reserves (until 2030 and 
2050) due to impacts such as 
upstream water usage, hydropower 
dam operation, climate change 
related precipitation variations, and 
salinization. 

•  Assess future demand for water 
in the city and impacts of water 
resource changes on the water 
demand for domestic and production 
uses of the city.

•  Propose measures to minimize these 

impacts.

Project lead

DONRE

Supporting partners

DPI, DOF, Cần Thơ Institute for Social-
economic Development (CISED), CTU, ISET

Scale 

Status

                +    regional

New proposal

Timeframe

2023-2025

Funding sources

City budget and donors

Related actions

1.1; 1.2; 2.8; 2.13; 3.4; 3.11

Resilience qualities

Action 2.10
Conduct research on solar energy development strategy and plans, and mechanisms to attract 
investment for solar energy development.

Project lead

DOIT

Action focuses on research to 
support the development of 
solar energy in Cần Thơ city 
until 2020. The research includes 
an assessment of solar energy 
potential, capacities and scale; 
identification of the needed 
roadmap and resources for solar 
energy development until 2030; as 
well as measures and mechanisms 
to attract investment. 

Supporting partners

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

Funding sources

Related actions

Resilience qualities

DPI, DOF, Vietnam Electricity Group (EVN) 
branch in Cần Thơ, GreenID, solar energy 
enterprises and investors

                

New proposal

2022-2024

City budget 

2.11; 2.14

72

73

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTURBAN INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEM PLANNING AND DESIGN 

Action 2.11
Conduct a study to improve the public transport system of Cần Thơ City.

This action focuses on: assessing 
the current needs and projecting 
future needs for public transport; 
exploring ways to improve the 
public transport network for the 
city, including piloting a Bus Rapid 
Transit (BRT) route and planning a 
system of bike lanes; and proposing 
measures for managing and 
operating the bus system to ensure 
transparency and service quality. 
To ensure resilient public transport 
system, the resilience approach 
and relevant qualities need to be 
considered in the analysis

Project lead

ODA PMU

Supporting partners

DOC, Department of Transport (DOT), 
CRO Office

Scale 

Status

                

established and in preparation for 
implementation 

Timeframe

2019-2021

Funding sources

ODA funds (WB and SECO) (approved)

Related actions

1.2; 2.9; 2.10; 2.13; 2.14

Resilience qualities

Action 2.12
Assess land subsidence in Cần Thơ and develop a land subsidence monitoring system.

This action focuses on the 
following activities:
•  Assess land subsidence in the 
central urban area of the city 
and its impacts; 

•  Identify causes of land 

subsidence; 

•  Propose measures to minimize 

subsidence; and 

•  Establish a land subsidence 

monitoring system. 

Project lead

DONRE

Supporting partners

DOC, DOT, DARD, Vietnam Department 
of Survey, Mapping and Geographic 
Information, CTU, CRO Office.

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

                

New proposal

2020 - 2023

Funding sources

City budget and donors

Related actions

1.5; 2.5; 2.7; 2.13; 2.14

Resilience qualities

DETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIONS

Action 2.13
Develop well-connected and consistent GIS database on key urban infrastructure, and information 
management and user interface system to support the planning and management of urban 
infrastructure.

This action focuses on: developing 
a well-connected and consistent 
GIS database on infrastructure 
systems (transport, water supply, 
drainage, elevation, flooding 
management, etc.); developing a 
mechanism for information update 
and sharing and capacity building for 
information management and use to 
effectively support the planning and 
management of urban infrastructure. 
This action is closely related to and 
is an integral part of Cần Thơ City’s 
spatial data strategy, which is being 
developed with the support of the 
WB. The database in this strategy 
focuses on three topics: integrated 
flood management, public transport 
connection, and social support 
system for flood response.

Project lead

DOC

Supporting partners

DOIC, DARD, Department of Science and 
Technology (DOST), DONRE, ODA PMU, 
Construction Planning Institute.

Scale 

Status

                

approved and ongoing

Timeframe

2018-2025

Funding sources

ODA funds (WB and SECO) (approved)

Related actions

1.1; 1.2; 1.5; 2.8; 2.11; 2.13; 2.14

Resilience qualities

Action 2.14
Integrate the resilience approach into urban infrastructure design and development plans. Pilot 
applications for flood management plans and the design of flood protection infrastructure of the city.

This action aims to strengthen the 
city infrastructure system’s resilience 
to extreme events in the context of 
climate change. In the first phase, 
the city plans to pilot the integration 
of a resilience approach in flood 
management plans and the design 
of flood protection infrastructure. 
The project will analyze and assess 
the simultaneous impacts of shocks 
and stresses (such as extreme 
rainfall, high tide, land subsidence, 
etc.) on urban infrastructure systems 
and identify and integrate measures 
to respond to extreme events into 
urban infrastructure design and 
planning.

Project lead

DOC

Supporting partners

DARD, DONRE, DPI, Dragon Institute, 
ISET, CRO Office, etc.

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

                

new proposal

2020-2030 (2020 – 2023 for the pilot 
project)

Funding sources

donors

Related actions

1.1; 1.2; 1.5; 2.7; 2.8; 2.11; 2.13

Resilience qualities

74

75

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENT3

Direction
ECONOMY 
& SOCIETY 

GOAL
A knowledge economy that is proactive, diverse and deeply 
integrated, while remaining steady when facing regional and global 
economic fluctuations

ACTIONS OVERVIEW

STRENGTHEN STAKEHOLDER LINKAGES
3.1 Improve linkages among baccaurea growers and develop baccaurea orchards for tourism activities 
to build the resilience of baccaurea growers in Phong Điền district (pilot project)
Timeframe: 2020 – 2021
3.2  Revise and consolidate the coordination mechanism among related departments to support 
sustainable agriculture value chains. Implement a pilot project on the coordination mechanism of 
catfish value chain.
Timeframe: 2020 – 2022
3.3 Improve the effectiveness and scale up the platform for regular dialogues between enterprises, 
investors, and scientists with city leadership and related department leaders. 
Timeframe: 2020 – 2030
STRENGTHEN COMPETITIVENESS AND MARKET ACCESS
3.4 Integrate the resilience approach into the proposed project on strengthening the competitiveness 
of Cần Thơ’s agriculture sector.
Timeframe: 2021-2027
3.5 Integrate the resilience approach into the implementation of the One Commune One Product 
(OCOP) project period 2018-2020 with vision to 2030.
Timeframe: 2018-2030
3.6 Study the feasibility of an insurance mechanism for agriculture production.
Timeframe: 2023-2025 
3.7 Enhance the resilience of Cần Thơ City’s catfish value chain through improving the quality of 
linkages between key actors and applying technology to control catfish quality (pilot project)
Timeframe: 2019-2021
3.8 Conduct a study on diversifying processed baccaurea products and improving post-harvest 
processing to expand the market.
Timeframe: 2020-2025
3.9 Develop supporting mechanisms and policies to incentivize enterprises focusing on clean 
agriculture products that also support livelihoods of the poor.
Timeframe: 2020-2025
IMPROVE PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION
3.10 Strengthen the capacity to assess market demand and supply of agricultural products to inform 
agriculture production planning
Timeframe: 2020-2025
3.11 Integrate resilience concepts into the implementation of the proposed project on restructuring 
the agriculture sector for added value and sustainable development until 2020 with vision to 2030.
Timeframe: 2017-2030
3.12 Strengthen the capacity of city departments for economic projection, integrated and systemic 
socio-economic development planning.
Timeframe: 2020-2025

Lê Thị Nguyệt Linh © Cần Thơ Department of Culture, Sports and Tourism

76

77

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTSTRENGTHEN STAKEHOLDER LINKAGES 

Action 3.1
Improve the linkages among baccaurea growers and develop baccaurea orchards for tourism activities 
to build the resilience of baccaurea growers in Phong Điền district. 

This proposal will 
enhance the quality 
of linkages among 
baccaurea growing 
households and diversify 
their income sources by 
developing baccaurea 
orchards into attractive 
ecotourism destinations. 
The project will help to 
address issues facing the 
farmer households such 
as weak and ineffective 
collaboration, short-lived 
appearance of fruits, 
difficulties in accessing 
and expanding in new 
markets.

Project lead

Division of Agricultural Development of Cần Thơ City

Supporting partners

Phong Điền District Center for Trade and Tourism 
Promotion, Phong Điền District DARD, Phong Điền 
District Department of Culture and Information 
(DOCST), CRO Office, CTU

Scale 

Status

                

new proposal (developed into pilot project proposal)

Timeframe

2020 - 2021

Funding sources

donors

Related actions

2.2; 3.5; 3.8

Resilience qualities

DETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIONS

Action 3.2
Revise and consolidate the coordination mechanism among related departments to support 
sustainable agriculture value chains. Implement a pilot project on the coordination mechanism of 
catfish value chain.

This action will develop a cross-sectoral 
coordination mechanism to provide 
support for key agricultural value chains. 
This will facilitate coordination among 
departments such as DARD (managing 
agriculture production activities), DOIT 
(marketing support), DOST (R&D for 
agricultural production and processing), 
DONRE (surveying and monitoring 
environmental and resource quality). This 
mechanism is expected to support actors 
such as farmers, processing and exporting 
enterprises, traders, etc. to add value to 
agricultural production.

Project lead

DARD

Supporting partners

DOIT, DOST, DONRE 

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

Funding sources

Related actions

Resilience qualities

                

new proposal

2020 - 2022

city budget

1.1; 3.7; 3.11

78

79

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTAction 3.3
Improve the effectiveness and scale up the platform for regular dialogues between enterprises, 
investors, and scientists and city leadership and related department leaders. 

This proposal aims to strengthen the 
mechanism for dialogues between 
enterprises, investors, scientists and 
the city government to improve the 
effectiveness of the government’s 
policies to support enterprises and 
investors, at the same ensure that 
they pay attention to their social and 
environmental responsibilities. Currently, 
dialogues between enterprises and 
the city are organized twice a year. This 
action proposes to: organize events by 
sector; and develop a robust monitoring 
mechanism with transparent reporting 
on the implementation of the city 
leadership’s direction in these platforms. 
Cần Thơ City will consult the experience 
of other provinces (such as Đà Nẵng and 
Bình Dương) to support implementation 
of this action.

Project lead

Center for Investment and Trade 
Promotion and Trade Fair

Supporting partners

DPI, DOIT, Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry of Cần Thơ (Cần Thơ VCCI), CRO 
Office, Enterprise Association, ISET

Scale 

Status

                

Action linked to existing efforts of the 
city

Timeframe

2020 - 2030

Funding sources

city budget

Related actions

1.1; 1.4; 3.1; 3.2; 3.9; 

Resilience qualities

DETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIONS

STRENGTHEN COMPETITIVENESS AND MARKET ACCESS

Action 3.4
Integrate the resilience approach into the proposed project on strengthening the competitiveness of 
Cần Thơ’s agriculture sector.

The project on strengthening the 
competitiveness of Cần Thơ’s agriculture 
sector focuses on strengthening policy and 
institutional incentives and encouraging 
investment in the agricultural sector, and 
promote public-private cooperation in 
commercializing key agricultural products. 
Moreover, the project will also contribute 
to building capacity in public investment 
planning and expenditure management, 
and promote private investments for 
commercialization of agricultural products. 
Currently, ADB supports the city to conduct 
a feasibility study for this project. 
The objective of this action is to ensure the 
identification and analysis of shocks and 
stresses, and their impacts on the agriculture 
sector during the implementation of the 
project to strengthen competitiveness of 
the agriculture sector of Cần Thơ, based on 
which results to identify measures to build 
resilience to these shocks and stresses.

Project lead

DARD

Supporting partners

Scale 

Status

DPI, DOIT, DOF, DOST, Institute 
for Agriculture and Rural 
Development Strategy and 
Policy, CRO Office.

                

Action linked to existing efforts 
of the city

Timeframe

2021 - 2027

Funding sources

city budget and donors (partly 
from ADB)

Related actions

1.1; 1.2; 3.5; 3.7; 3.9; 3.10; 3.11

Resilience qualities

Lê Thị Nguyệt Linh © Cần Thơ Department of Culture, Sports and Tourism

Nguyễn Thơ © ISET-International

80

81

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTAction 3.5
Integrate the resilience approach into the implementation of the One Commune One Product (OCOP) 
project period 2018-2020 with vision to 2030.

OCOP is the program to promote 
rural economic development for 
internal capacity development 
and added value. At the core 
of the OCOP program is the 
development of advantaged 
agriculture and non-agriculture 
products and services of each 
locality via their value chains, 
involving private (enterprises, 
production households) and 
public economic actors. The 
budget of this program in Cần Thơ 
is about 1600 billion VND.
The objective of this proposal 
is to ensure that shocks and 
stresses and their impacts on 
selected products are identified 
and analyzed, in order to propose 
measures to build resilience to 
these shocks and stresses.

Project lead

DARD

Supporting partners

City New Rural Development Program 
Coordination Office, DOIT, DOST, DOCST, 
Department of Health (DOH), Cần Thơ Center for 
Investment and Trade Promotion and Trade Fair, 
district level PCs, commune level PCs, and other 
related agencies.

Scale 

Status

                

Action linked to existing efforts of the city

Timeframe

2018-2030 (ongoing)

Funding sources

city and national budgets 

Related actions

1.1; 1.2; 2.2; 3.4; 3.7; 3.8; 3.9; 3.10; 3.11

Resilience qualities

Action 3.6
Study the feasibility of an insurance mechanism for agricultural production.

This action will study the 
feasibility of agricultural 
production insurance to reduce 
risks to producers from extreme 
climate events, disease or 
other hazards. The feasibility 
study will focus on well-known 
agricultural crops with well-
understood risks that are widely 
cultivated, in order that risks 
are well understood and can be 
broadly shared. This action is 
consistent with the orientation 
of the national Government on 
agriculture insurance (see Decree 
no. 58/2018/NĐ-CP)

Project lead

DARD

Supporting partners

DOIT, DOF, providers of agriculture insurance 
services, enterprises, farmers and agriculture 
cooperatives 

Scale 

Status

                

new proposal

Timeframe

2023-2025

Funding sources

city budget and donors 

Related actions

3.4; 3.11

Resilience qualities

DETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIONS

Action 3.7
Enhancing the resilience of Cần Thơ City’s catfish value chain through improving the quality of linkages 
between key actors and applying technology to control catfish quality.

This action will strengthen the 
linkages between actors in the 
value chain and apply blockchain 
based technology to monitor the 
quality of catfish products. The 
proposal is developed to address 
constraints in the existing catfish 
value chain. Producers and traders 
need a verifiable independent and 
transparent database system that 
will track inputs, such as quality 
of juveniles and feed, disease 
treatment, and water quality, along 
with measures of product quality 
such as size, fat content, etc. A 
shared but independent database 
will enable better tracking of 
product origins, but also provide 
incentives for producers to 
improve the quality of inputs and 
environmental management. 

Project lead

Cần Thơ City Division of Aquaculture

Supporting partners

Scale 

Status

 Cần Thơ Aquaculture Association, related 
agencies under DARD, CRO Office, enterprises 
that purchase and process catfish, catfish 
farming households, Faculty of Information 
Technology and Communication and Faculty 
of Aquaculture from CTU

                

+ enterprises

new proposal (developed into pilot project 
proposal)

Timeframe

2020-2021 (pilot project)

Funding sources

city budget and donors 

Related actions

3.4; 3.11

Resilience qualities

Action 3.8
Conduct a study on diversifying processed baccaurea products and improving post-harvest processing 
to expand the market.

The proposed action has three 
main components: (i) Research 
on processed baccaurea products 
such as baccaurea juice and jam. (ii) 
Research on post-harvest processing 
and preservation techniques for 
baccaurea fruit. Results of these 
two activities will help to increase 
value of baccaurea production by 
expanding the market for baccaurea 
and its processed products; (iii) 
Branding and market research 
to promote the baccaurea brand 
name. This activity will expand the 
market for baccaurea by promoting 
customer demand and sales through 
large retail enterprises such as 
Coopmart, Vinmart, and Big C.

Project lead

DARD

Supporting partners

DOIT, DOST, DPI, VCCI Cần Thơ, 
processing enterprises, baccaurea 
growing households/cooperatives, major 
supermarkets (such as Coopmart, Vinmart, 
Big C), CTU.

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

                

new proposal

2020-2025

Funding sources

city budget and donors 

Related actions

3.1; 3.4; 3.5; 3.9; 3.11

Resilience qualities

82

83

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTAction 3.9
Develop supporting mechanisms and policies to incentivize enterprises focusing on clean agriculture 
products that also support livelihoods of the poor.

The objective of this 
action is to encourage 
clean and sustainable 
high value-added 
agricultural production 
networks. In addition, 
the city will develop 
policies to incentivize 
clean agricultural 
enterprises to support 
livelihood improvement 
of disadvantaged 
households by 
hiring labors from 
these households 
or supporting them 
in developing clean 
agricultural production 
activities. 

Project lead

DPI 

Supporting partners

DARD, DOST, DPI, DOF, DOLISA, district PCs, Cần Thơ 
Enterprise Association, enterprises that are applying 
clean agriculture production models (such as Minh 
Hòa, Cần Thơ Farm), Small and Medium Enterprise 
Supporting Center

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

                

new proposal

2020-2025

Funding sources

city budget and donors

Related actions

3.4; 3.11

Resilience qualities

DETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIONS

IMPROVE PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION 

Action 3.10
Strengthen the capacity to assess market demand and supply of agricultural products to inform 
agriculture production planning.

This proposal will train technical 
staff and economists from DARD 
and DOIT and related agencies to 
enable them to better assess market 
demand and supply of agriculture 
products. This will help the city to 
better plan for the production of 
key agriculture products, especially 
new products and products also 
offered by other provinces in the 
region. This action is also expected 
to partly address the problems of 
spontaneous crop adoption, good 
harvest bad price / bad harvest good 
price. 

Project lead

DOIT 

Supporting partners

DARD, DPI, CRO Office

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

                

new proposal

2020-2025

Funding sources

city budget and donors

Related actions

1.1; 3.4; 3.5; 3.8; 3.11; 3.12

Resilience qualities

© CRO Office in Cần Thơ

84

Lê Thị Nguyệt Linh © Cần Thơ Department of Culture, Sports 
and Tourism

85

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTAction 3.11
Integrate the resilience approach into the implementation of the proposed project on restructuring the 
agriculture sector for added value and sustainable development until 2020 with vision to 2030.

The main objectives of the project on 
restructuring the agriculture sector are: 
(i) add value and develop agriculture 
production for high quality, sustainability, 
and improved competitiveness; (ii) Develop 
key products and concentrated high-
tech production areas, and strengthen 
value chain linkages from production to 
consumption. The project also develops 
sources of high-quality seeds and 
varieties to meet the needs of agriculture 
development within the city and for other 
provinces in the Mekong Delta. 
The objective of this action is to ensure 
that shocks and stresses and their impacts 
on the agriculture sector are identified 
and analyzed, and resilience qualities 
are considered in identifying measures 
for agriculture sector restructuring. By 
integrating a resilience perspective in this 
proposed project, the agriculture sector 
will be better able to cope with climate and 
market uncertainties in the future.

Project lead

DARD

Supporting partners

Scale 

Status

DPI, DOF, DOIT, DOC, DONRE, 
DOST, district PCs and related 
agencies, Cửu Long Delta Rice 
Research Institute, CTU, etc

                

Action linked to existing efforts 
of the city

Timeframe

2017-2030 (ongoing)

Funding sources

city budget and donors 

Related actions

1.1; 1.2; 1.3; 3.2; 3.4; 3.5; 3.8; 3.10; 
3.12

Resilience qualities

DETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIONS

Action 3.12
Strengthen the capacity of city departments for economic projection, integrated and systemic socio-
economic development planning.

This proposed project will 
support the city in developing 
and implementing its socio-
economic plans according to 
the new Planning Law, at the 
same time builds capacity for 
city departments and agencies. 
This action includes training 
on the approach, methods, 
and tools to improve the 
capacity of city departments 
and agencies for economic 
projection, integrated and 
systemic planning, impact 
assessment as well as 
integration of measures to 
build the city’s resilience to 
shocks and stresses.

Project lead

DPI

Supporting partners

DOIT, DOC, DOF, CISED, Institute for 
Construction Planning, CRO Office, ISET, 
Central Institute for Economic Management 
(CIEM), Vietnam Institute for Development 
Strategy - VIDS (potential)

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

                

new proposal

2020-2025

Funding sources

city budget and donors 

Related actions

1.1; 3.4; 3.5; 3.10; 3.11

Resilience qualities

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2014

86

© CRO Office in Cần Thơ

87

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENT4

Direction

HEALTH AND 
WELL-BEING 

GOAL
Communities have secure and stable income, and live in a green and 
clean environment, buffered from the impacts of economic, social 
and environmental shocks and stresses.

ACTIONS OVERVIEW

VOCATIONAL AND JOB TRAINING
4.1 Provide training in domestic service for disadvantaged women as a livelihood improvement 
opportunity (pilot project)
Timeframe: 2020 – 2021 
4.2 Integrate the resilience approach into refining policies and programs related to job support and 
vocational training 
Timeframe: 2020 – 2025
4.3 Develop and implement a collaborative mechanism and support programs on vocational training 
and employment for resettled households.
Timeframe: 2020 – 2025
EMPLOYMENT, PRODUCTION AND HOUSING OPTIONS FOR DISADVANTAGED 
GROUPS 
4.4 Improve and replicate production systems for mud-free eel raising to diversify income sources for 
disadvantaged households in rural and peri-urban areas (pilot project).
Timeframe: 2020 – 2021
4.5 Integrate the resilience approach into policies and programs for livelihood improvement and new 
agriculture production models for disadvantaged groups in rural areas.
Timeframe: 2020 – 2025
4.6 Adjust housing support policies and programs to strengthen the resilience of poor and vulnerable 
households.
Timeframe: 2022 – 2025
EVIDENCE-BASED POLICY 
4.7 Conduct research to assess the conditions, characteristics and resilience of migrant groups in the 
core urban area of Cần Thơ city and propose support measures.
Timeframe: 2020 – 2022
4.8 Develop a comprehensive database and information management system on disadvantaged and 
vulnerable groups.
Timeframe: 2019 – 2021
4.9  Assess employment trends and forecast labor demand in Cần Thơ until 2030.
Timeframe: 2022 – 2025

© Văn Phòng CCCO Cần Thơ

88

89

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTVOCATIONAL AND JOB TRAINING

Action 4.1
Provide training in domestic service for disadvantaged women as a livelihood improvement 
opportunity (pilot project).

This action will improve the economic 
resilience of women from disadvantaged 
social groups in urban and peri-urban 
areas of Cần Thơ City (including from 
resettled households) by providing 
training and certification for domestic 
service. There is increasing demand from 
wealthier households for full- or part-time 
domestic staff for cleaning, cooking or 
child care, but there are few vocational 
training programs for this purpose, and 
no recognized qualification standards. 
The project is designed to help address 
these limitations and provide training, 
certification and employment for about 
40 women from disadvantaged groups in 
Cần Thơ City. Experience from this pilot 
will be recorded and documented for 
wide sharing and to promote scaling up 
and replication. 

Project lead

Cần Thơ City Job Services Centre (JSC)

Supporting partners

CRO Office, Cần Thơ WU, Division of 
Vocational Training under Cần Thơ 
DOLISA, district DOLISAs

Scale 

Status

                

new proposal (pilot project, proposal 
developed and submitted to donor) 

Timeframe

2020 - 2021

Funding sources

donors and matching funds from the 
city

Related actions

4.2; 4.3; 4.8

Resilience qualities

URBAN DEVELOPMENT, RESETTLEMENT AND JOBS

According to Phase II assessment, real estate development in Cần Thơ is increasing. In a recent 
busy period, there were 23 construction projects underway in An Khánh alone, on a total land 
area of 1,495.964 ha, which displaced about 2,298 households (UBND-An Khánh 2017b). 

These households are resettled by the city under regulations that include provision of new 
housing and support for finding new employment if needed. But resettlement  still causes 
disruptions to production and business activities of the affected households. More than 90% 
of surveyed households identified changes in livelihood and income as the most significant 
negative impacts of resettlement.

Policies to support these households are considered ineffective and inadequate.

DETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIONS

Action 4.2
Integrate the resilience approach into refining policies and programs related to job support and 
vocational training. 

This action focuses on refining and supplementing 
existing policies on job support and vocational 
training in general and for disadvantaged groups  in 
particular. The refinement will introduce resilience 
concepts to help ensure: 
•  Efforts to support disadvantaged groups are 

designed with a long-term vision and implemented 
continuously in different phases; 

•  Vocational training and related support programs 
respond directly to the changing requirements of 
the labor market, and the variable qualifications and 
characteristics of program participants. Employment 
support programs and advisory services should be 
more responsive to these variables and consider 
changing conditions and future scenarios;

•  To support wage employees to identify and 

prepare for potential shocks and stresses (such as 
unemployment, labor market competition, changing 
technology etc.);

•  To further encourage and support participants who 
are highly motivated to learn and find employment.

Project lead

DOLISA

Supporting partners

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

CRO Office, WU, 
Vocational training 
division under Cần Thơ 
DOLISA, district DOLISAs

                

new proposal 

2020-2025

Funding sources

city budget and donors

Related actions

1.1; 1.2; 1.3; 4.1; 4.3; 4.8; 
4.9

Resilience qualities

Action 4.3
Develop and implement a collaborative mechanism and support programs on vocational training and 
employment for resettled households. 

This action will develop and implement a 
collaborative mechanism among investors, 
DOLISA, vocational training agencies, 
employers, and JSC to provide advice 
and support to individuals from resettled 
households to help them find stable 
employment in their new location. This 
support includes various aspects, from 
assessing the needs and demands of the 
labor market, assessing the characteristics 
and needs of employment seekers, providing 
job advice, designing and organizing 
vocational training classes based on 
assessment results, and providing support 
in accessing employers and job seeking. 
After developing these mechanisms, at 
specific project will be designed for pilot 
implementation. Experience and lessons 
from the pilot project will be the basis for 
finalizing the collaborative mechanism.

Project lead

DOLISA

Supporting partners

DONRE, Land Development Center, 
investors of projects involving 
resettlement, companies with labor 
demand, JSC, vocational training 
agencies, and CRO Office.

Scale 

Status
Timeframe

                

new proposal 
2020-2025

Funding sources

city budget and donors

Related actions

1.1; 1.2; 1.3; 4.1; 4.2; 4.8; 4.9

Resilience qualities

90

91

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTEMPLOYMENT, PRODUCTION AND HOUSING OPTIONS FOR 
DISADVANTAGED GROUPS

Action 4.4
Improve and replicate production systems for mud-free eel raising to diversify income sources for 
disadvantaged households in rural and peri-urban areas.

This project aims to diversify the 
livelihood and income sources of 
disadvantaged small landholders 
in rural and peri-urban areas 
through enhancements to mud-
free eel raising. This practice has 
been applied successfully in some 
areas of Cần Thơ City and has high 
potential for replication thanks to 
low land requirement and minimal 
investment. If successful, this 
practice could bring an additional 
and stable supplementary income 
source for households, building 
their resilience to current and future 
shocks and stresses. Experience 
from this pilot project will be 
synthesized and documented for 
wide sharing to promote scaling up 
this livelihood model. The project 
is proposed to be implemented in 
Vĩnh Thạnh and Bình Thủy districts.

Project lead

Cần Thơ’s Farmers’ Association

Supporting partners

Scale 

Status

CRO Office, Division of Aquaculture, 
DOLISA, Vietnam Bank for Social 
Policies (VBSP) in Cần Thơ, Agriculture 
Promotion Unit, Bình Thủy and Vĩnh 
Thạnh district DOLISAs, VBSP branches 
and Farmers’ Associations in Bình Thủy 
and Vĩnh Thạnh districts, Tam Lộc 
Cooperative.

                

proposal for model replication (proposal 
developed and submitted to potential 
donors) 

Timeframe

2020 - 2021

Funding sources

donor and city budget 

Related actions

4.5; 4.8

Resilience qualities

DETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIONS

Action 4.5
Integrate the resilience approach into policies and programs for livelihood improvement and new 
agriculture production models for disadvantaged groups in rural areas.

This action would review and update 
existing policies and programs based on 
resilience concepts to:
•  Incorporate a more long-term orientation 

and roadmap to improve livelihoods 
over several different time scales (short, 
medium and long-term);

•  Integrate characteristics of people’s 
livelihoods, production and business 
conditions, awareness, experience and 
needs in the design and implementation 
of vocational support programs and 
projects;

•  Strengthen training to improve general 
business skills and to access consumer 
markets in addition to building technical/
production skills;

•  Provide training to disadvantaged groups 

to help them prepare for unexpected 
shocks and stresses and to develop 
alternative plans in case of unemployment, 
market losses, crop failure, etc.

Project lead

DARD 

Supporting partners

DOLISA, district Centers of Agriculture 
Promotion, agriculture vocational 
training agencies, associations such 
as Farmers’ Association, WU, and CRO 
Office, CTU

Scale 

Status

                

new proposal

Timeframe

2020 - 2025

Funding sources

city budget and donors

Related actions

1.1; 1.2; 1.3; 3.9; 3.11; 4.4; 4.8

Resilience qualities

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2018

92

Nguyễn Thơ © ISET-International

93

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTAction 4.6
Adjust housing support policies and programs to strengthen the resilience of poor and vulnerable 
households.

This action aims to adjust policies and 
programs (under the authority of Cần Thơ 
City to issue and manage), to:
•  Develop options for landless 
disadvantaged households;

•  Integrate resilience concepts, especially 
related to shocks of storms and flooding, 
into the process of designing and 
building houses for disadvantaged 
households; 

•  Increase the level of support (such as 
through combining multiple financial 
sources) to ensure the minimum amount 
needed for households to build or 
retrofit their houses to be strong and 
resilient to shocks and stresses. 

Project lead

DOC

Supporting partners

DOLISA, Fatherland’s Front, CRO Office, 
Cần Thơ Institute for Planning and 
Architecture, Cần Thơ City Architecture 
Association, CTU, ISET.

Scale 

Status

                

new proposal

Timeframe

2022-2025

Funding sources

city budget  

Related actions

1.1; 1.2; 4.5; 4.7

Resilience qualities

DETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIONS

EVIDENCE-BASED POLICY 

Action 4.7
Conduct research to assess the conditions, characteristics and resilience of migrant groups in the core 
urban area of Cần Thơ city and propose support measures.

This action will identify the 
characteristics (such as number, 
age, gender, job, location and 
condition of residence, migration 
history, etc.) of unregistered migrant 
groups in core urban areas of Cần 
Thơ City. This group is generally not 
documented in official population 
or census data. The proposed 
project will also assess shocks 
and stresses facing migrants, their 
vulnerability and resilience. Study 
results are expected to support 
the city in dealing with issues such 
as social well-being, employment, 
environment, etc.   

Project lead

CRO Office

Supporting partners

DOLISA, DARD, DOLISAs of core urban 
districts, City Statistical Office, People’s 
Committees of wards located in the 
core urban districts, ISET, CTU

Scale 

Status

Timeframe

                

new proposal

2020-2022

Funding sources

city budget and donors

Related actions

1.1; 1.2; 1.3; 4.1; 4.3; 4.8

Resilience qualities

Nguyễn Thơ © ISET-International

94

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2014

95

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTAction 4.8
Develop a comprehensive database and information management system on disadvantaged and 
vulnerable groups.

This action will develop a comprehensive and 
synchronized database on disadvantaged and 
vulnerable groups in Cần Thơ City. This database 
will include many layers of information and will 
be based on available data (such as poverty rate, 
access to basic services, etc.) as well as newly 
collected data (such as migrant data, locational 
mapping, characteristics of livelihoods, health, 
shocks and stresses, exposure and resilience, etc.). 
Flood maps will also be developed, specifying areas 
and households subject to high flood risk. This 
database will be updated regularly. A mechanism 
on the management, use and sharing of 
information will also be developed to maximize the 
effectiveness of this database. Most activities under 
this proposed action will be implemented under 
the technical assistance component of the Cần Thơ 
Urban Development and Resilience Project. 

Project lead

DOLISA

Supporting partners ODA PMU of Cần Thơ, DOIC, 

DONRE, DOC, DARD, CRO Office

Scale 

Status

                

formed and in preparation for 
implementation 

Timeframe

2020-2022

Funding sources

ODA funds from WB and SECO 
(approved) 

Related actions

1.1; 1.3; 1.5; 4.4; 4.5; 4.6; 4.7

Resilience qualities

DETAILS OF PROPOSED ACTIONS

Action 4.9
Assess employment trends and forecast labor demand in Cần Thơ until 2030.

The urbanization process and the 
changing economic structure have 
caused and will continue to cause 
considerable changes in livelihoods 
and employment. However, the city has 
not undertaken any comprehensive 
assessment of these changes. 
Therefore, to support the city to 
introduce appropriate plans and 
policies, this proposed action will 
assess employment trends and forecast 
labor demand in Cần Thơ until 2030 
in the areas of agriculture (including 
aquaculture), construction, trade and 
services. The research will also provide 
suggestions and recommendations 
for modifying existing city policies in 
vocational training and livelihood and 
job support.

Project lead

DOLISA

Supporting 
partners

Scale 

Status

CISED, Cần Thơ JSC, Cần Thơ Chamber 
of Commerce and Trade, CRO Office, Ho 
Chi Minh City Center for Labor Demand 
Forecasting and Labor Market Information 
(potentially)

                

new proposal

Timeframe

2022-2025

Funding sources

city budget and donors

Related actions

1.2; 3.3; 3.12; 4.2; 4.8

Resilience qualities

96

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International

97

CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGYCAN THRESILIENTSTRATEGY 
IMPLEMENTATION  

Successful implementation of the Cần Thơ Resilience Strategy 
will require close collaboration between the city government 
and social organizations, local communities, businesses, 
universities, institutes and other organizations. 

98
© Huy Nguyễn

99

STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATIONCAN THRESILIENTIMPLEMENTATION ORGANIZATION  
& STAKEHOLDER ROLES

The city People’s Committee assigns the CRO Office 
to be the focal point for the implementation of 
this strategy. Specifically, the CRO Office will be 
responsible for: 

• Collaborating with city departments and 

agencies and other stakeholders to develop 
detailed plans for strategy implementation. 

• Coordinating the implementation of all actions 

proposed in this strategy. 

• Directly leading the implementation of 

selected actions in the strategy for which they 
are responsible.

• Mobilizing the participation and support of 

stakeholders, especially local communities in 
strategy implementation. 

• Mobilizing resources from donors and NGOs to 

support the implementation of actions.

• Working closely with research and training 

institutions in Cần Thơ and the Cửu Long 
Delta, especially the Dragon Institute in the 
implementation of proposed actions.

• Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) of 

strategy implementation. 

• Communication and awareness raising 

activities about resilience building for the city 
population in general and for students and the 
youth in particular. 

• Periodic reporting (twice a year) to the 

city leadership on the progress and results 
of implementation. 

The Cần Thơ PC assigns DOC, DARD, DOLISA and 
their supporting agencies to take initiatives to 
mobilize resources and implement actions directly 
relevant to their departments, in collaboration with 
the CRO Office. 

DPI, DOF and DOFA, according to their roles and 
functions, are responsible for allocating resources 
and mobilizing support from international and 
domestic sources to facilitate the implementation 
of the Cần Thơ Resilience Strategy period  
2019-2030.

Other departments and agencies, districts, 
wards and commune governments, and social 
associations are responsible for taking the initiative 
to work with the CRO Office, DOC, DARD, and 
DOLISA to implement this strategy. 

In the implementation process, if any adjustments 
or additions are needed, relevant departments, 
agencies and local governments, together with 
the CRO Office, will report to the Cần Thơ PC for 
consideration and decision.

After the Strategy Release Workshop, city 
leadership will organize a meeting with 
relevant departments and the CRO Office 
to identify activities that can be linked to 
programs and projects of the city in 2020 
and in the following years. This will be an 
important basis to allocate and mobilize 
resources for the implementation of the 
Strategy.

© CCCO Cần Thơ

Cần Thơ City Government commits to play an active 
role in directing city departments and agencies 
and mobilizing stakeholders to implement the 
actions proposed under this strategy. The following 
principles must be followed in the implementation 
process to ensure success: 

• Maintain and strengthen resources for the CRO 
Office to implement and promote the strategy 
actions 

• Ensure effective collaboration among 

stakeholders 

• Mobilize as much as possible the participation 

of the whole society, especially the private 
sector, communities and researchers 

• Apply the principles of flexibility and 

redundancy in the implementation process 

• Document and widely share lessons and 

experience 

• Propose new ideas for resilience building 

during the implementation process. 

100

101

STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATIONCAN THRESILIENTMONITORING 
& EVALUATION 

Monitoring and Evaluation is an important task in the 
process of building resilience for Cần Thơ City. M&E 
results will help the city to draw experience and capture 
lessons for the replication of effective models, and adjust 
activities and implementation approach to optimize the 
city’s efforts. For M&E to be effective, Cần Thơ City will:

• Assign the CRO Office to be the focal point for 
M&E activities.

• Develop an M&E framework and work plan for 
activities proposed in this CRS. 

• Prepare annual reports on activity results to share 
with related stakeholders. 

• Engage other stakeholders in M&E work. 

102

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2015

103

STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATIONCAN THRESILIENTAcknowledgement 

Lời cảm ơn

The Cần Thơ Resilience Strategy until 2030 is the result of nearly two years of constant, highly-
committed and dedicated efforts and cooperation of the city leadership, local governments across 
levels, city departments and agencies, associations, enterprises, local communities, and the CRO 
Office, with the support of organizations and individuals both from Vietnam and internationally. 

Cần Thơ City would like to extend our sincere thanks to all organizations and individuals who have 
participated and provided valuable support for the completion of this Strategy:

Mr. Đào Anh Dũng, Standing Vice Chairman of the Cần Thơ City People’s Committee, Head of 
Advisory Board of the 100 Resilient Cities in Cần Thơ;

Members of the Advisory Board of the 100 Resilient Cities in Cần Thơ;

Members of core working groups in four discovery areas and members of the inter-disciplinary 
technical working group of the city;

Members of the CRO Office: Assoc. Prof. Dr. Nguyễn Hiếu Trung – City Resilience Officer (CRO); Ms. 
Lê Đình Vân Khanh – Deputy CRO; and technical staff of the CRO Office: Ms. Quách Thanh Trúc; Ms. 
Hoàng Hoài Thanh; Ms. La Sở Sen; Ms. Duy Minh Châu; Mr. Nguyễn Thanh Liêm; Mr. Lê Công Thành;

The Institute for Social and Environmental Transition-Vietnam (Strategy Partner of the project);

City departments and agencies: City People’s Committee Office; Department of Natural Resources 
and Environment; Department of Agriculture and Rural Development; Department of Planning and 
Investment; Department of Labors, War Invalids and Social Affairs; Department of Foreign Affairs; 
Department of Finance, Department of Culture, Sports and Tourism; Department of Internal Affairs; 
Department of Transport; Department of Education and Training; Department of Information 
and Communication; Department of Industry and Trade; Department of Science and Technology; 
Department of Health; Institute for Construction Planning; Cần Thơ Institute for Socio-Economic 
Development; ODA Project Management Unit; Vietnam Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Cần 
Thơ Branch; Cần Thơ Hydrometeorological Station;

Agencies under city departments and local governments, especially: Cần Thơ Job Service 
Center; Climate Change Coordination Office; Division of Aquaculture; Division of Crops and Plant 
Protection; Division of Agriculture Development; Center for Investment and Trade Promotion and 
Trade Fair; Small and Medium Enterprise Supporting Center; Cần Thơ Land Development Center; 
Division of Environment Protection; Department of Urban Management of Ninh Kiều District; 
Department of Labors, War Invalids and Social Affairs of Ninh Kiều District; Department of Education 
and Training of Ninh Kiều District; An Khánh Secondary School;

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2014

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2015

104

People’s Committees of districts, wards and communes in Cần Thơ City, especially Ninh Kiều District 
People’s Committee; Cái Răng District People’s Committee; Phong Điền District People’s Committee; 
Vĩnh Thạnh District People’s Committee; An Khánh Ward People’s Committee; An Bình Ward People’s 
Committee; Cái Khế Ward People’s Committee; Lê Bình Ward People’s Committee; Phú Thứ Ward 
People’s Committee; Vĩnh Bình Commune People’s Committee; Thạnh Lộc Commune People’s 
Committee; Vĩnh Trinh Commune People’s Committee; Thạnh Tiến Commune People’s Committee; 
Nhơn Ái Commune People’s Committee; Phong Điền Town People’s Committee;

Social organizations and associations in the city, especially Farmers’ Association; Women’s Union; 
Architecture Association; Aquaculture Association; Enterprise Association; the Red Cross; Cần Thơ City 
Labor Federation; Cần Thơ City Union.

Independent experts and experts from Cần Thơ University, South Cần Thơ University, Research 
Institute for Climate Change of Cần Thơ University, Cần Thơ Institute for Socio-Economic Development; 
Cửu Long River Delta Research and Development Institute; Hồ Chí Minh City National University; 
Vietnam Mekong River Commission;

Enterprises in the city, especially: Cần Thơ Urban Jointstock Company ; Cần Thơ Water Supply and 
Drainage Jointstock Company ; Cần Thơ Farm; Minh Hòa Investment and Development Jointstock 
Company ; Đại Thuận Thiên Clean Agriculture Company, Ltd; Biển Đông Company; Nam Việt Company; 
Sao Mai Company; Nam Phương Aquaculture Company, Ltd; Minh Tân Company, Ltd; Thắng Lợi 
Cooperative; Bảy Thum Baccaurea Cooperative; VinaCAP Clean Agriculture Company, Ltd; Phạm Nghĩa 
T&N Company; Thuận Hưng Company Ltd; Sông Hậu Food Processing Jointstock Company ;

Local communities and people, especially communities in An Khánh Ward; An Bình Ward; Lê Bình Ward; 
Phú Thứ Ward; Cái Khế Ward; Phong Điền Town; Vĩnh Trinh Commune; Thạnh Lộc Commune; Vĩnh Bình 
Commune; Thạnh Tiến Commune; Nhơn Ái Commune; 

Experts from the 100 Resilient Cities, Asia Pacific Office;

International organizations, including: the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
Organization (CSIRO), Bending Bamboo, Deltares, EstudioOCA, and ACADIS.

105

RESILIENCE APPROACH AND STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT  PROCESSCAN THRESILIENTAPPENDICES

APPENDIX 1. 
TERMINOLOGY*
*The concepts presented in this section are defined based on the City Resilience Framework of the 
100RC Program. For more information, please see: https://assets.rockefellerfoundation.org/app/
uploads/20160105134829/100RC-City-Resilience-Framework.pdf

Shocks and stresses
Cities are often threatened by chronic stresses 
and acute shocks. Shocks are typically single 
extreme events that cause serious damages to 
public infrastructure and private property in a city, 
such as storms, flooding, earthquakes, disease 
outbreaks, and severe infrastructure failures. 
Stresses are factors that apply pressure to a city’s 
systems or residents on a daily or reoccurring 
basis, with gradual harmful impacts. Examples 
of stresses include high unemployment, water 
resource depletion, increased air pollution, aging 
infrastructure, and sea level rise.

Qualities of a resilient system or city  
To build a resilient city, actions need to be 
designed and implemented to ensure that systems, 
individuals, organizations and communities have 
the following qualities of resilience. These qualities 
ensure that the city can sustain, effectively and 
timely respond, and quickly adapt to shocks 
and stresses.

Reflectiveness
Is the ability of individuals and organizations to 
draw from and use past experience and lessons 
to inform future decisions, and modify standards 
and behaviors accordingly to better respond to 
changing circumstances and challenges. 

Resourcefulness 
is the ability of individuals and organizations 
to recognize alternative ways to use resources 
at times of crisis in order to meet their needs or 
achieve their goals in periods of crisis (caused by 
acute shocks). For example, the ability to mobilize 
various resources (from the government, citizens, 
businesses) for disaster relief and recovery efforts; 
or the ability to maintain and use well water and 
a filtering system to respond to water supply 
interruptions following a disaster event. 

Robustness, redundancy and flexibility are 
qualities of a resilient system. A robust system 
is a system that is conceived, constructed and 
managed to make provision of potential failures 
and ensure no catastrophic damages will occur 
when design thresholds are exceeded. For example, 
the sewage system is designed to handle 50mm/h 
rainfall events when the actual rainfall exceeds 
50mm/h.

Redundancy
Is the spare capacity purposively created to 
accommodate disruptions due to extreme 
pressures, surges in demand or an external event. 
It also includes diversity where there are multiple 
ways to achieve a given need. For example, back-
up electricity source or water storage capacity 
to accommodate supply network disruptions; or 

106

address needs of and problems faced by the 
most vulnerable, and collectively create a resilient 
city – for everyone. Specifically, inclusiveness 
is recognized by ensuring the meaningful 
participation of all stakeholders and that their voice 
and expectations are accounted for in the city’s 
resilience building process. Integrated process 
is recognized by ensuring the participation of 
stakeholders and that analysis and assessment are 
conducted in a systematic, comprehensive and 
inter-disciplinary manner

contingency storage of medicines and food before 
the storm season. 

Flexibility 
is the ability to adopt alternative strategies in 
response to changing circumstances or sudden 
crises. Systems can be made more flexible 
through introducing new technologies or various 
knowledge sources, including scientific and 
indigenous knowledge. For example, community 
flood and storm shelter (which can be used as a 
public space for community activities in normal 
times, and as shelter for local people when there is 
a major storm or flooding event.

Inclusive and integrated 
Inclusive and integrated relate to the processes 
of good governance and effective leadership that 
ensure investments and actions are appropriate, 

Ngô Thanh © ISET-International, 2015

107

APPENDICESCAN THRESILIENTAPPENDIX 2. 
LIST OF IMPORTANT ONGOING PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS RELATED TO FOCUS 
AREAS OF CẦN THƠ RESILIENCE STRATEGY*
*This list is for reference only and is not inclusive of all programs and projects that the city is and will be 
implementing.

No.

PROGRAM / PROJECT

1

2

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

Urban upgrade project of the Mekong Delta region, Cần Thơ City Component 

Cần Thơ Urban Development and Resilience Project 

Ô Môn Electricity Generating Station, Block B Ô Môn Gas Pipeline and Gas Distribution Center

Construction of Trung Lương - Cần Thơ Highway; Sóc Trăng - Cần Thơ - Châu Đốc Highway; 
Cần Thơ Port Upgrade and Expansion

Construction of Cần Thơ 2, Vàm Cống Bridges

Construction of concentrated information and technology zone and information and 
technology enterprise incubation center

Construction of solid waste treatment area in Thới Lai District

Review and update rural water supply and sanitation plan for Cần Thơ City until 2020

Water drainage and wastewater treatment project of Cần Thơ City

Embankment to control erosion in Xóm Chài, Trà Niền River, Ô Môn River, Trà Nóc River

Environmental landscape and water resource protection and control program

Construction of Sông Hậu Park

Cồn Ấu, cồn Sơn Ecotourism Area; Tân Lộc Island Tourism Area

Construction of regional trade center 

Construction of a system of regional-level warehouses, transportation and distribution centers 

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

Restructuring the agriculture sector for added value and sustainable development until 2020 
with vision to 2030 

“One commune, one product” project, period 2018 - 2020, with vision to 2030

Agriculture development with application of high technology in Cần Thơ City period 2012-
2020

Development of aquaculture development center of Cần Thơ, with close association with 
aquaculture production zones of the Cửu Long Delta

Infrastructure development for concentrated catfish farming zones in Thốt Nốt, and Vĩnh 
Thạnh districts

Application of high technology in aquaculture production 

Infrastructure development for concentrated catfish and carp nursery zones

Construction of high technology industrial zones for agriculture production 

Sustainable agriculture transition in Cần Thơ City

Measures for shifting the economic structure of Cần Thơ City until 2020 

Tourism development program until 2020 

Renovation and development of social support, period 2018 - 2025 with vision to 2030

Vocational training for rural labors in Cần Thơ City until 2020

Human resource training program for Cần Thơ city until 2010 with vision to 2020

Implementation plan of National Target Program on sustainability poverty reduction in the 
city, period 2016 - 2020

Action plan to respond to climate change, period 2015-2030

Annual natural disaster prevention and control plan of Cần Thơ City

108

109

APPENDICESCAN THRESILIENTREFERENCES

Cần Thơ-CTK 2017, Statistical Yearbook of Cần Thơ City 2017, Cần Thơ Statistics Office.

Đinh Tuấn, Võ Tuấn, Nguyễn Trung, Trần Phóng, Vũ Toàn & Nguyễn Minh 2019, Building resilience to flooding 
and inundation for Cần Thơ City using green infrastructure measures, Can Thơ.

GoV 2013a, Decision No. 1533/QĐ-TTg about the approval of the socio-economic development master plan 
until 2020 with vision to 2030, The Central Government of Vietnam.

GoV 2013b, Decision no. 1515/QĐ-TTg dated Aug 28, 2013 on Approval of the Adjustments to the Master 
plan of Cần Thơ City until 2030 with vision to 2050, The Central Government of Vietnam.

Green-ID 2018, Combining solar energy and agricultural production: International experience and potentials 
for Vietnam, Green Innovation and Development Center-GreenID, Hanoi.

MONRE 2016, Climate change and sea level rise scenarios for Vietnam, Ministry of Environment and Natural 
Resources.

UBND-CanTho 2015, Action Plan to respond to climate change of Cần Thơ city, 2015-2030, People’s 
Committee of Cần Thơ city.

UBND-CầnThơ 2010, Cần Thơ City Climate Change Resilience Plan, Cần Thơ People’s Committee - Steering 
Committee for the Implementation of the Decision No. 158.

UBND-CầnThơ 2014a, Synthesis report about the revision of Cần Thơ socio-economic development master plan 
until 2020, with vision to 2030, Cần Thơ People’s Committee, Cần Thơ.

UBND-CầnThơ 2015a, Synthesis report on solutions for economic structure shifts for Cần Thơ city until 2020, 
People’s Committee of Cần Thơ.

UBND-CầnThơ 2015b, Decision No. 3814/QĐ-UBND o the approval of the Project on solutions for economic 
structure shifts for Cần Thơ city until 2020, Cần Thơ People’s Committee.

UBND-CầnThơ 2017, Report about preliminary results of the five years of implementation of the socio-
economic development master plan until 2020, with vision to 2030, Cần Thơ People’s Committee.

UBND-CầnThơ 2018, Socio-economic Development Plan of Cần Thơ City 2019, issued with Decision no. 3228/
QD-UBND dated Dec 10, 2018 by Cần Thơ People’s Committee.

VIAP-SIUP 2013, Narrative report of project for modifying the master plan of Cần Thơ City until 2030 with vision 
to 2050, Institute for Architecture, Urban and Rural Planning & Southern Institute for Urban and Rural 
Planning, Can Tho.

110

© Văn Phòng CCCO Cần Thơ

111

REFERENCESCAN THRESILIENTRESILIENT

CAN 
TH

112

Lê Thị Nguyệt Linh © Cần Thơ Department of Culture, Sports and Tourism

CAN THRESILIENT