RESILIENT DA NANG

RESILIENCE STRATEGY FOR  DA NANG CITY, VIETNAM

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
LETTER FROM THE CHAIRMAN 
 
 
LETTER FROM 100RC   
 
ACRONYMS 
 
 
 
 
 
TERMINOLOGY 
 
 
1) EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
    - VISION 
 
 
2) RESILIENCE APPROACH AND APPLICATION 
3) DA NANG CITY: PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE 
4) DA NANG’S RESILIENCE STRATEGY 
 
 
    - STRATEGY #1  ACTIONS 
 
    - STRATEGY #2  ACTIONS 
 
 
 
    - STRATEGY #3  ACTIONS 
 
    - STRATEGY #4  ACTIONS 
 
5) PARTNERSHIPS IN ACTION   
 
6) IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING 
 
7) REFERENCES AND CREDITS 
8) APPENDICES 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1
2
3
4
5
6
7 
9
23
25
35   
43
53 
63
65
67
69 

RESILIENT   DA NANG  
RESILIENT   DA NANG  

LETTER FROM THE CHAIRMAN

	   HUYNH DUC THO

Chairman of Da Nang 
People’s Committee

Da Nang has experienced a period of growth and positive socio-economic change that has led us to 
become the biggest city in central Vietnam. This growth and prosperity has been recognized by many 
different international organizations and we are proud to have won the Asian Townscape Award and to 
be a burgeoning tourist destination attracting three million visitors per year. Da Nang also leads in the 
PCI (Vietnam Provincial Competitiveness Index) rankings, the Governance and Public Administration 
Performance Index (PAPI), and continues its reign as the top performing province in the Information 
and Communication Technology (ICT) Index for six years consecutively. It is thanks to the efforts of 
the whole community, all citizens and municipal authorities that we have been able to achieve this 
success.

However, as a coastal city, we are vulnerable to the severe the effects of natural disasters such 
as typhoons and floods. We have also become a global city and as such we are learning how 
urbanization and globalization are beginning to influence our city. As Da Nang continues to grow 
and develop we need to consider the challenges and change the future will bring when we think 
about urban planning, infrastructure development and management, water resource management, 
employment and public health.

At the end of 2013, Da Nang was honored to be selected by the Rockefeller Foundation as part of the 
first group of 33 cities to join the 100 Resilient Cities network.

This program and its holistic approach to resilience building is exactly what our city needs to survive 
and thrive in the face of adversity and to continue to grow stronger into the future. Resilience building 
helps citizens, communities and all of the systems within a city to better prepare for and recover from 
the shocks and stresses we may face. This includes catastrophes both natural and man-made as well 
as the slow-moving disasters that we face in the form of daily stresses on our city and community.  
We consider this a comprehensive approach that can help us become a community and an urban 
system that can be resilient regardless of the challenges we face.  

Resilience building is not the sole responsibility of individuals or sectors. This process requires the 
cooperation and solidarity of the whole community, local businesses and the government. Specifically, 
municipal authorities must develop policies and programs for infrastructure investment, economic 
development and the building of social security. Businesses must ensure the operation of 
sustainable economic systems and the community and civic organizations must work to ensure we 
have an equitable, caring and adaptable society prepared to overcome and learn from any challenge.  

This resilience strategy and the actions it lays out is the first step towards creating a resilient future 
for our city. But it is only part of the solution. In order to establish a pathway for the city toward 
sustainable development, we must all embrace resilience thinking and understand that we are all 
a part of the development process. 

Yours faithfully,
Huynh Duc Tho
Chairman of Da Nang People’s Committee

LETTER FROM 100RC

On behalf of the entire 100 Resilient Cities team, it is my honor to congratulate the city 
of Da Nang on the release of its resilience strategy. The work outlined within the strategy 
takes a bold approach toward confronting not only Da Nang’s most severe shocks- from 
typhoons, floods, and heat waves, but also its most pressing stresses- such as water 
shortage, access to gainful employment, and improving public health. Da Nang’s goal 
of building toward a peaceful, dynamic, prepared and connected city in the changing 
world reflects exactly the type of holistic urban resilience approach that 100RC seeks to 
spread far beyond our network of member cities. 

The support and leadership of Chairman Huynh Duc Tho and the Da Nang People’s 
Committee were critical to the development of this document, and we thank them for 
their commitment to the strategy process. Of course, this strategy would not have been 
possible without the tireless dedication of Da Nang’s Chief Resilience Officer, Cuong 
Dinh Quang - and his exceptional team. Lastly, I would also like to extend thanks to our 
strategic partners from ISET- who provided invaluable expertise throughout this process 
and helped to build off the groundbreaking work previously undertaken in partnership 
with the Rockefeller Foundation through the Asian Cities Climate Change Resilience 
Network (ACCCRN).   

Though the release of this strategy marks an important milestone in the pursuit of a 
more resilient Da Nang, we know that building urban resilience is a multi-generational 
effort.  We also know that our success will not be measured by how well we plan for our 
future challenges- but rather how we implement the projects that will make the city as 
a whole stronger in the face of those challenges, no matter what form they may take. 
That is why we are so excited to continue our partnership into the implementation 
phase- to bring all of the innovative projects from concept to reality.  That body of 
work- which varies from connecting the city’s labor supply to growing business 
demands, increasing the city’s organic food production, creating a Building Energy 
Accelerator, to establishing a comprehensive database that identifies homes most at 
risk to flooding- will positively impact the lives of all who reside in Da Nang, when 
disaster strikes and during the times in-between. 

These projects will also serve as a valuable best practice for the rest of the 100RC 
Network to emulate. As one of the cities selected in the first round of the 100 Resilient 
Cities Challenge- Da Nang has time and again been a pioneer in our global movement.  
We could not be more excited to showcase the work we have done in partnership with 
our colleagues there- and to watch as Da Nang helps to spread the urban resilience 
revolution to cities across Vietnam, the Asia-Pacific region, and the world.  

Congratulations again on this important achievement, and we look forward to the 
shared journey ahead.  

Yours Faithfully,

Michael Berkowitz
President, 100 Resilient Cities

MICHAEL BERKOWITZ
President of 
100 Resilient Cities - 
Pioneered by The 
Rockefeller Foundation.

2

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

LIST OF ACRONYMS 

3S

ADB

AFD

3s Software Co., Ltd

Asian Development Bank

French Development Agency

Akzo Nobel AkzoNobel - leading global paints and coatings company

CCCO

Climate Change Coordination Office

CRO

CRF

CSIRO

Chief Resilience Officer

City Resilience Framework

Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
Organization of Australia

DARD

Department of Agriculture and Rural development

DOC

DOF

Department of Construction

Department of Finance

DOLISA

Department of Labours, Invalids and Social Affairs

DONRE

Department of Natural Resources and Environment

DIDIF

DISED

FA

ISET

PRA

Da Nang Development and Investment Fund

Da Nang Institute for Socio-Economic Development

Focus Area

Institute for Social and Environmental Transition

Preliminary Resilience Assessment

Swiss Re

Swiss Re Group-a leading wholesale provider of 
reinsurance, insurance of risk transfer

VCAP

Visual Climate Adaptation Platform

VINARE

Vietnam National Reinsurance Corporation

VN

Vietnam

TERMINOLOGY

Resilience: The capacity of individuals, communities, institutions, businesses and systems within a city to survive, adapt and grow no    
matter what kinds of chronic stresses or acute shocks they encounter.

Shock: A chronic (ongoing) or acute natural or man-made event or phenomenon threatening major loss of life, damage to assets and a 
city’s ability to function and provide basic services, particularly for poor or vulnerable populations.

Stress: A chronic (ongoing) or acute natural or man-made event or phenomenon that renders the city less able to function and provide 
basic services, particularly for poor or vulnerable populations.  
 
Resilience Assets: The physical, economic, social, built and natural resources, systems, infrastructure, services, organizations, etc. 
that contribute to a city’s resilience.

Focus Area: Important high-level areas or issues mentioned in the city’s Preliminary Resilience Assessment (PRA) report that the city 
desires to investigate further to identify scope of work during the resilience strategy development.

Resilience Strategy (RS): A tactical roadmap to build resilience in the city. The strategy articulates the city’s resilience priorities and 
specific initiatives for immediate implementation as well as the city’s longer continued path forward.  The strategy and implementation 
process is supported by various partnerships including 100RC Platform Partners.

Platform Partner: The Platform is a curated suite of resilience-building tools and services, provided by partners from the private, 
public, academic, and non-profit sectors, giving our cities access to the resources they need to become more resilient.

4

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

1 - EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Despite being recognized as one of the fastest growing cities in Vietnam and one of the most attractive tourism destinations in South-
east Asia, Da Nang is vulnerable to shocks such as typhoons, floods, heat waves, droughts and saline intrusion and to long-term 
stresses such as typhoon and flood damaged housing, water shortages, unemployment, poor health care, and business continuity 
challenges.

Extreme weather events over the past few years have put pressure on the city. Typhoons, floods and droughts occur regularly, 
causing significant losses and presenting challenges to the government and citizens: housing, employment, and infrastructure revi-
talization after disasters; water supply for development demands; food hygiene; and livelihood improvement. These challenges are 
predicted to increase with development, climate change, and population growth. Failing to address them could lead to the decline of 
efficiency and productivity of some sectors and socio-economic fields in the city. For this reason, Da Nang has welcomed Rockefeller 
100 Resilient Cities support to pro-actively build city resilience.

Resilience is the capacity of individuals, communities, institutions, businesses, and systems within a city to survive, adapt, and grow, 
no matter what kinds of chronic stresses and acute shocks they experience. In Da Nang City, the following natural disaster-related 
SHOCKS:
• Typhoons
• Floods
• Flash floods
• Inundation
• Drought
• Saline intrusion

STRESSES: 
• Housing Vulnerable to Typhoons
• Livelihoods of People Living in Resettlement Areas and Urbanized Areas
• Urban Traffic
• Water Supply
• Environmental Concerns
• Health Care
• Revitalization of Community and Businesses

In November 2015, Da Nang launched a Preliminary Resilience Assessment (PRA) which identified four areas in which the city 
needs to conduct in-depth studies and develop specific action plans, projects and initiatives to prepare adequate resources for city 
development.  The end result of these planning efforts is Da Nang’s Resilience Strategy. 

The Resilience Strategy focuses on dealing with the major challenges of four focus areas of Da Nang’s urban resilience planning.
With this approach, Da Nang Resilience Strategy does not include or replace other existing strategies and plans of the city such 
as the Socio-economic Development Strategy, the Urban Development Planning, the Green Growth-led City Development Strategy 
and the Environmental City Plan. Under the view of urban resilience, the Resilience Strategy points out priority actions and initiatives 
that are needed to deal with future challenges.
The Resilience Strategy is intended to be a living document that helps Da Nang become a city where residents can live in peace, have 
a dynamic economy with state-of-the-art infrastructure and resilient plans that address the city’s shocks and stresses. Ongoing 100RC 
partnership will strengthen collaboration and assistance of needed resources and relevant partners, as well as providing meaningful 
exchange opportunities with other member cities.

Da Nang is the first city of Vietnam to develop and release a Resilience Strategy but implementing city resilience requires more than 
just a document. It requires an engaged community of residents from all walks of life partnering to combat the many challenges that 
confront the city. The proposed strategy actions are expected to inspire greater collaboration between the Da Nang city government 
and the public in order to jointly enhance city resilience.

Let’s join hands to build a Da Nang City resilient to shocks and stresses in a changing world!

VISION
Da Nang, a peaceful, dynamic, prepared 
and connected city in the changing world.

6

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

2 - RESILIENCE APPROACH AND APPLICATION
SNAP SHOT OF DA NANG’S RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

Da Nang is a rapidly growing transportation, services, and tourism hub in central Vietnam. The city sits on a long strip of low-lying 
coastline, with the city center resting along the Han River. This city is no stranger to flooding. Typhoons have battered the city, and 
variable rainfall has caused both droughts and floods. The poor and near-poor households of the city face unstable employment and 
insufficient access to health care, education, housing, and other services. For years, the city has been developing innovative models 
to enhance resilience to climate change, including early flood warning systems and improved urban planning. Despite the challenges, 
Da Nang has become an attractive destination in Vietnam for Foreign Direct Investment (FDI).  It also has ambitions of increasingly 
becoming a regional leader and powerhouse of innovation. The goal of the Resilience Strategy is to help the city to develop a compre-
hensive plan on how it can best address its multiple challenges and opportunities.

INITIAL STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT
With the support from 100RC, the CRO office was established and is led by the CRO and staff from the Da Nang Climate Change 
Coordination Office. The CRO has engaged a wide range of stakeholders to develop the resilient strategy, including technical 
departments, mass organizations, local experts and CCCO staffs. The process began with preliminary resilience assessment (PRA), 
including more than a dozen consultation meetings with working group and communities. The assessment aimed to identify key shocks 
and stresses the city is facing, to examine community resilience, and to review the existing resilient actions and projects that have been 
conducted in Da Nang. 
 
Based on the PRA and in-depth research, the strategy team developed four guiding questions it would need to focus on to create 
resilience actions.  These include: 1) How can the city build safe communities against storms and floods?; 2) How should the city 
stimulate livelihood, development and job opportunities for communities in transitional or newly urbanized areas? 3) When and how 
should the city protect and build water retention and storage spaces in response to climate change?; and 4) How can the city integrate 
information technology in response to natural disasters and climate change? Da Nang arrived at these questions by implementing 
a process common across the 100RC Network which uses the City Resilience Framework or CRF (shown right). The 12 drivers of 
resilience help determine where cities have a higher or lower level of resilience. The team further tested opportunities to respond in 
these four areas by applying a series of 100RC planning characteristics and process review questions knows as the “Resilience Lens” 
and “Resilience Qualities” (Appendix 3).
STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT PROCESS  AND SUPPORT
This effort was conducted by the CRO, CRO team, and experts from key technical departments (list of participants can be found in 
appendix 2). Research included revising existing data and information, conducting surveys and interviews with relevant stakeholders. 
The resulting four focus areas provided the basis for which the joint ISET and Da Nang strategy team developed the Resilient Strategy.
 
The development process is highlighted with various consultation meetings engaging wide range of stakeholders. For each focus 
area, the CRO team conducted approximately four technical workshops and meetings with key stakeholders. Regarding the Resilience 
Strategy, the CRO team has organized three technical consultations. The strategy was submitted to 100RC, the Da Nang Steering 
Committee and the Vice Chairman of the People’s Committee for review on September 8, 2016.  Through this process, Da Nang built a 
consensus and appreciation for the city’s approach to resilience and prioritized actions/initiatives that increase urban resilience
MINING LESSONS OF THE PAST WITH AN EYE TOWARD THE FUTURE
To develop Da Nang’s specific strategy actions, it is critical to understand both its past and future challenges.  Da Nang’s ongoing 
challenges and past lessons learned helped set the stage for how the Resilience Strategy was developed. To that end, an overview 
of the cities struggles, key issues and trends are detailed in the following section. 

100RC CRF

Health & Wellbeing

Economy & Society

Infrastructure & Environment

  Related Da Nang Strategies
   A PEACEFUL CITY - A city that removes fear and   
   anxiety from places where residents live, work and   
   recreate. 

   A DYNAMIC CITY - A city with dynamic economy 
   in partnership with people and business to meet 
   needs in a changing world.

   A PREPARED CITY - A city with infrastructure 
   systems which can recover, and be well prepared 
   for challenges in development process.

Leadership & Strategy 

   A CONNECTED CITY - A city where knowledge is 
   driven by meaningful information sharing. 

8

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

3 - DA NANG CITY: PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE

OVERVIEW OF DA NANG’S HISTORY
Da Nang has a long history dating back to when the city was founded in 192 AD. Today, Da Nang is one of the five big cities in 
Vietnam. While this document deals largely with its more recent past it ís important to note the city’s rich culture and long history 
facing any number of shocks and stresses that have not only challenged Da Nang but shown its resilience.  

DA NANG

DA NANG PAST ( BEFORE THE YEAR 2000)

In the middle of the 16th century, Hoi An was a busy trade center about 30 km 
south of Da Nang and Da Nang was only a small port for goods in transit and ship 
repair. Da Nang gradually developed into a commercial port, replacing Hoi An in 
the early 18th century. French colonists separated Da Nang from Quang Nam as 
a concession and renamed the city Tourane, transforming it into a Western-style 
urban center in the late 19th and early 20th century. Social infrastructure and 
manufacturing engineering received continuous investment, and new household 
livelihoods and manufacturing industries were established and developed.

In 1975, the city gained independence, entering a new era of reform and 
development. In 1996, the 10th Session of the 9th National Assembly of the 
Socialist Republic of Vietnam approved the separation of Da Nang city and 
Quang Nam province from Quang Nam – Da Nang province, making the city 
a separate (centrally administered) municipality, one of the few in Vietnam. On 
January 1, 1997, Da Nang became a new administrative unit, with a natural land 
area of 1,248.4 km2, and a population of 660 thousand.

In July 2003, Da Nang was recognized as a First Class city of Vietnam. On 
October 16, 2003, the Politburo released Resolution No 33-NQ/TW outlining plans 
for further industrialization and modernization of Da Nang, providing the city with 
more chances for development.

PAST URBAN RESILIENCE
The primary shocks and stresses of this period included typhoons and floods in 1998 and 1999, and inadequate basic living conditions, 
including water and power shortages, infrastructure challenges, urban traffic, environment quality problems, and economic recession. 

However, there is little data available on this period for the four 100RC resilience dimensions with which to establish a baseline 
resilience. The broad conclusions that can be drawn about pre-2000 resilience include: 

Generally, Health and wellbeing of this period had many shortcomings. 
The major stress was post-war stabilization and rehabilitation. At this time, with a fragile economy after the war, the city 
government focused on dealing with difficulties and recovering production.
• The typhoons and floods in 1998 and 1999 caused 69 deaths.
• The 1998 flood inundated over 19,000 houses.

The Economy and society saw a mixture of positive changes and challenges. 
A wide range of new production industries and new types of trade were introduced to Da Nang. However, scales were quite 
small and mainly used imported materials and outdated facilities and equipment. Labor productivity stayed low. Serious 
hyperinflation and economic recession occurred nationwide. Culture, health and education all had low quality. 
The economy, which is primarily agriculture (Ag), industry, and services, shifted from agriculture toward increased services:
• 21% Ag. - 33% industry - 46% services in 1976 
• 10% Ag. - 35% industry - 55% services in 1997

Initial plans and programs for Da Nang’s reform and development appeared during this period.
• The city was recognized a First Class city of VN
• “5 No’s, 3 Yes’s” program was introduced — no starvation, no illiteracy, no beggars, no drug-addicts, 
  no murders/robberies; all residents have houses, stable jobs and a cultural lifestyle.

	  

Urban infrastructure and environmental quality were invested and improved
Infrastructure and Environment were impacted by recurrent disasters. Typhoons and floods occurred regularly, leading to 
devastating damage to infrastructure and environment.

	  

Aerial view of the urban center of 
Da Nang in the past and at present.

10

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

DA NANG PRESENT (2005-2015)

Over the past 10 years Da Nang has become:

1. A MEDIUM-SIZED CITY WITH ALMOST CONSISTENT URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES SYSTEMS
Since 2005, Da Nang has developed six urban districts and two rural districts, including: Hai Chau, Thanh Khe, Son Tra, Ngu Hanh 
Son, Lien Chieu, and Cam Le as urban districts, Hoa Vang as a rural district and Hoang Sa as an island district. Da Nang total 
population was 1,007,425 as of 2014, with an estimated population density of 784 people/km2. 87% of Da Nang’s population 
(880,000 inhabitants) live in urban areas while 13% live in rural areas.

During this period, Da Nang invested in space, infrastructure and urban architecture development under the guiding principle of 
“extending the coastline, stretching the river”. Accordingly, the city put emphasis on the construction of bridges over the Han River, 
investment in riverside and coastal routes, making good use of land area, and promoting the value of urban lands. Improvements to 
transportation networks and connectivity in urban areas have changed the city and have gradually narrowed the gap between urban 
and rural areas. At the same time, the consistent development of infrastructure systems has attracted a wide variety of investors and 
urban and residential projects.

In addition to transportation infrastructure, the city also promoted investment in the medical sector, encouraging the construction of the 
Da Nang’s Women’s Hospital, the Maternity and Pediatric Hospital, and the Da Nang Oncology Hospital. Culture and tourism focused 
projects included construction of the International Exhibition Fair Center, the Da Nang Historical Museum, the Tien Son Sports Palace, 
and other infrastructure in districts throughout the city. 

2. A RAPIDLY URBANIZING CITY FOCUSING ON TOURISM-SERVICES, DEVELOPING CLEAN INDUSTRIES AND TECHNOLOGY
To expand its existing reputation as a tourism destination, Da Nang has recently invested in a series of big-scale tourism infrastructure 
projects. A new terminal for the Da Nang International Airport has been constructed, allowing the airport to serve an expected 6 to 8 
million passengers, and 400,000 to one million metric tons of cargo per year. In the next decade, Da Nang International Airport is 
expected to see an estimated 10 to 12 million visitors per year.

Along with infrastructure development to attract more investment and tourism, Da Nang also desires to promote the industrial sector, 
especially high technology and clean industries.

3. A CITY WITH A SMOOTHLY-OPERATING ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM SERVING ALL RESIDENTS AND BUSINESSES
In 2011, Da Nang authorities promulgated a program of administrative reform for the period of 2011-2020. Accordingly, by 2020, 
Da Nang will have a strengthened, democratic, transparent, professional and modern administrative system within the city that ensures 
consistent management with high efficiency, satisfies public demands, and supports socio-economic development.

In 2014, Da Nang People’s Committee established the Steering Committee for Action Plan for implementation of the “Da Nang 
Business Year 2014” program, promulgating the Da Nang Enterprise Development Scheme and Da Nang Economic Reforms Plan 
until 2020. The city is also promoting outreach activities, establishing hotlines, holding meetings and directing dialogues addressing the 
difficulties and challenges faced by businesses. Especially, the city has reviewed and adjusted a number of policies to better support 
businesses, such as land-use efficiency policy in industrial zones and for coastal projects. Da Nang authorities strengthened the 
operation of the Investment and Development Fund, a Credit guarantee fund for local small and medium-sized enterprises, as well as 
lowering interest rates (including those of old loans) to below 13% per annum and supporting businesses to cooperate, connect supply 
and demand, sell more products and boost production and trading. These specific programs and policies have assisted businesses 
in stabilizing and developing their production and trade activities, contributing to meeting socio-economic development achievement 
goals. More importantly, revenues from businesses have become the main budget revenues of the city, making up nearly 50% of the 
GDP.

4. A CITY OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND SECURITY, WITH A PROTECTED ENVIRONMENT, AND RESPONSIVE TO DISASTERS
Since 2000, in addition to construction investments, the city has conducted the program of “5 No’s, 3 Yes’s,” which is now deeply 
rooted in local culture and values. This program includes mandates for “No hunger/poverty,” “No illiteracy,” “No begging,” “No drug 
addicts,” and “No murder/robbery.” In 2014, the city continued to focus on social welfare work, finishing construction and maintenance 
of 950 houses for social policy families. In 2014 Da Nang became the first locality to complete a plan for repairing the houses of 
veteran. The total capital for housing assistance to veteran and ethnic minority families reached 24 billion VND (1.08 million USD) in 
2015.
At the end of 2014, nearly 100% of relocated households received assistance to build their new house. In addition, from 2011-2015, 
the program for Storm-resistant housing, funded by Rockefeller Foundation and implemented by the Da Nang Women’s Union built or 
renovated 420 houses for typhoon resilience.

DA NANG
TODAY 

GOVERNMENT:  
POPULATION:  
DENSITY:  
AREAS: 
 
GRDP PER CAPITA:   2,568 USD (2015)

 MUNICIPALITY
1,029,000 PEOPLE  (2015)
784 PEOPLE / KM2
1285 KM2

TYPE OF CLIMATE:  TROPICAL MONSOON
AVERAGE  
TEMPERATURE: 
AVERAGE 
ANNUAL RAINFALL: 2,066MM

25.6•C

Leaders of the Da Nang Municipal Communist Party Committee 
check on housing repair progress in Ngu Hanh Son District. 

12

	  

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

DA NANG PRESENT URBAN RESILIENCE (2005-2015)

The primary shocks and stresses between 2005 and 2015 included: typhoons and super typhoons Xangsane (October 2006), 
Ketsana (September 2009), and Nari (November 2013), floods (2007, 2008, 2011 and 2013), droughts, saline intrusion (2014), 
rapid urbanization, and regional economic recession (2010-2014).  

General analysis follows:

The city has paid attention to activities in the dimension of Health and wellbeing. Social security, life protection, and 
peace have been ensured. The city has strengthened the network of ward/commune health centers and provided most of 
the hospitals with adequate facilities and equipment. Social security and wellbeing-related activities gained several 
achievements, with successful implementation of the “5 No’s, 3 Yes’s” program.

• The proportion of households occupying permanent or semi-permanent homes increased from 94% in 2002 to 96.5% in 
2008 to 99.8% in 2012.
• As of 2012, 99.6% percent of households enjoy clean water (up from 97.2% in 2002).
• The percentage of domestic waste collection as of 2015 reached 93% (98% of which was from urban areas). 
• According to the standards of the city, poor households decreased from 11,735 households (6.4% of total city households) 
  in 2006 to 1,934 households (0.85% of total city households) in 2012.  As of 2015, poor households is reduce to 0%.
• Approximately 23.6% of children under five suffered malnutrition in 2003; in 2013 this number had dropped to 5.2%.
• The proportion of residents with access to hygienic toilets reached 60% in 1999, and 96% in 2010.

Although disaster-related shocks occurred regularly, the economy of the city retained double-digit growth rates. 
Even between 2010 and 2014, during the global economic crisis, the city growth rate remained around 9.7% per year.

The service sector had strong development in terms of scale and variety of services, reaching a growth rate of 12.8% per 
year. Da Nang’s industrial production also had a high growth rate. However, due to urbanization, several residential areas 
suffered impacts to livelihoods. In addition, the increase in immigrant laborers has increased the pressure on utilities, which 
have been unable to satisfy rising demands.

• Industrial production value: 8.5%/year in 2005-2010, increased to 9.7%/year in 2010-2014. 
• Labor force accounted for 44% as of the population in 1997; unemployment was at 5.4%. In 2014, the labor force 
  accounted for 53% of the population, with an unemployment rate of 3.6%. 
• Trained labors constituted 22% of the labor force in 1997, 9% of which had college or university degrees. In 2014, 
   trained labors made up 65% of the labor force, 39% of which have college or university degrees.

Despite facing many shocks and stresses during this period, Da Nang has maintained their strong economy and 
development rate thanks to the effective leadership and progressive management policies of Da Nang authorities. 
Da Nang is also the pioneer city to implement policies such as urban improvement, social security, information and 
technology application, and administrative reforms.

Social issues facing residents have been addressed gradually. An active program to build new rural areas is leading to a 
considerable change in rural appearance, in particular through the investment in power systems and transportation routes, 
and construction of educational and medical centers. Vocational training opportunities are providing employment for rural 
laborers with good results.

• Urban planing is now incorporating flood modeling, inundation impacts, and climate change.
• The city has released long-term objectives: The  “Environmental City”; The E-government, The Resilient City.
• Scenarios for climate change and disaster response have been developed and are starting to be used in planning.

The city has a consistent infrastructure system, with well developed transportation systems and large-scale 
architectural construction. These factors have brought a “young” and “modern” look to the city.

Infrastructure development has become the bedrock for development of other areas. Though recent shocks and stresses 
have severely affected the city’s infrastructure systems and environment in some locations, basic services in those areas 
have been maintained, contributing to a reduction in the vulnerability of those communities and the city.  

• The proportion of industrial zones with direct connections to the city’s sewage disposal system has reached 97%.
• The percentage of the city’s population with access to clean water reached 95%.
• Clean water leakage from the treatment and piping system were reduced to 18%. 
• There are four main wastewater treatment plants, with a combined capacity of 100,000 m3/day.

However, the robustness of infrastructure systems under disaster scenarios and/or with climate change has not been 
assessed. Issues such as floodwater drainage, traffic congestion, and water and power supply contingency planning require 
additional attention.

14

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

DA NANG FUTURE (2016-2020, WITH A VISION TO 2030)

Urban features and development trends of Da Nang in the future are described as follows:

RAPID DEVELOPMENT 
At the urban scale, population will increase significantly due to the increase in immigrant labors. By 2030 Da Nang’s population 
is estimated to be 2.5 million as shown in the chart below. Labor demand forecasting trends are similarly expected to increase 
as shown in page 16.

BECOMING A REGIONAL URBAN CENTER
As a modern regional urban center, and a national and international socio-economic center Da Nang will strongly and rapidly 
develop its transport infrastructure, high-technology centers, tourism, distribution and logistic centers in the future.

TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT
Building and maintaining cutting-edge urban transport systems is one of the key elements contributing to development of 
urban areas within a city. Da Nang, along with other surrounding localities, will be well connected by the network of highways. 
According to the approved planning, additional roads will be constructed along Da Nang’s edges and riverside and coastal 
areas, including: The southern edge route (from 1A National Route to DT604 Route), the western edge route (from Da Nang 
– Quang Ngai highway), the northern edge route along Cu De River (as the riverside main route, connecting new urban areas 
along the river), and the southern edge route along Cau Do River (from DT604 Route to Cam Le Bridge, connecting with roads 
to Hoa Xuan urban area).

DEVELOPMENT OF CLEAN INDUSTRIES UTILIZING HIGH TECHNOLOGY
Da Nang Hi-Tech Park is one of the three national hi-tech parks of Vietnam, which will be a destination for both domestic 
and foreign investors, boosting the science and technology of Da Nang and the Central Vietnam and Western Highlands. 
Industries for investment attraction include: Bio-tech applied for agriculture, aquaculture and healthcare; Microelectronics, 
mechanical-electronics and opto-electronics; Automation and precision mechanics; New energies, nano technology and new 
materials; Information and communications technology; computer software; Environmental technology, technology applied for 
petrochemistry and other special industries.

DEVELOPMENT OF TOURISM, DISTRIBUTION AND LOGISTIC CENTERS, “ENVIRONMENTAL CITY”
In terms of tourism, the World Cultural Heritage Sites in Hue, Hoi An and My Son can be connected to Da Nang and Tam Ky, 
creating huge potential for the growth of a regional coastal tourism hub. The sector of distribution and logistic has been 
developed along the East-West Economic Corridor, Vietnam’s No.1 National Route. Da Nang owns an international airport 
and port, stretching to the southern part to connect to industrial areas and enhance its competitiveness.

DA NANG’S POPULATION GROWTH UP TO 2030
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500

1954

1975

1995

2000

2005

2010

2014

2020

2030

LABOR DEMAND FORECASTING, 2015-2020

Contents
Total population
Labor demands 
Working age population
Trained laborers (70%)
In-migration labor demands

Units
Persons
Persons

 

Persons
Persons

2015

(statistical)
1,029,000
579,721

 

44,400

2016

(forecast)
1,143,200

2017

(forecast)
1,257,400

2018

(forecast)
1,371,600

2019

(forecast)
1,485,800

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

2020

(forecast)
1,600,000
*847,600
1,120,000
784,000
63,000

114
16

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

IMPACTS, RISKS AND ANALYSIS OF FUTURE RESILIENCE CHALLENGES

ISSUE 1
CLIMATE CHANGE IMPLICATIONS FOR URBAN AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Shocks such as typhoons, floods, heat waves, droughts, saline intrusion are unpredictable, impact the city, and are likely to 
increase. Da Nang lies within the tropical belt of the Northern Hemisphere. The weather is influenced by monsoon circulation 
and directly affected by tropical disturbances such as typhoons, tropical depressions, and the inter-tropical convergence zone. 
Vietnam’s complicated terrain, with high mountains and steep slopes lying right next to deltas, coupled with intense monsoon 
and typhoon rainfalls, result in regular floods.

Between 1998 and 2015, there were 26 typhoons, 13 tropical depressions and 46 floods directly affecting Da Nang City, 
resulting in 219 deaths/missing persons, 226 injured, loss of 156 ships, and destruction of 138,134 houses. Infrastructure and 
agriculture losses over these events totaled 9,401.6 billion VND (423 million USD).

Typhoon Nari, in 2013, resulted in 7,049 houses with detached roofs, 435 other homes inundated, 221 classrooms with 
detached roofs, 35 kindergartens severely damaged, 90m of fence collapsing and 1.539 m2 of fence broken. Moreover, 
there were over 40,000 uprooted trees and 5,000 seriously damaged ones, resulting in huge ecosystem losses. The flood 
in November 14-16, 2013, due to heavy rain, resulted in inundation of and serious damage to 32,793 homes.

In addition to disaster-related shocks, the city’s urban water supply is under stress. Droughts, saline intrusion in rivers and 
river water exploitation are increasingly impacting the ability to meet water demand, which in turn increases the pressure on 
socio-economic sectors such as tourism development, environmental sanitation, and public health. A detailed list of these 
shocks and stresses follows.

Shocks 
& Stresses
Rising 
Intensity 
of Typhoons

  Associated 
  Risks & Impacts
• Houses of the poor are seriously damaged, hard to recover after typhoons.
• Tourism, services and industrial production are disrupted. 
• Traffic network is interrupted, increasing risk for tourists and residents.

Flooding 
Increase

• Housing and construction along rivers and in low-lying areas are damaged.
• Flooding affects residents’ lives including loss of life as well as financial and social impacts.
• Property value within the city are reduced.
• Constructions and infrastructure along rivers and in low-lying areas are damaged.

Heat Waves

• There is an increase in demands for energy.
• Production activities (including tourism) are affected.
• Infectious diseases increase among community.

Droughts

• Prices for water access, treatment and supply increase. 
• Conflicts arise between water users (irrigation, hydro-power generation, household use and agriculture).
• Water quality decreases as flow volumes drop.
• Saline intrusion increases due to reduced flow volume.
• Agricultural productivity is reduced, leading to livelihood decline in rural areas.

18

	  

Typhoon No.11 in 2013 destroys 
the Bach Dang Street balcony.

RESILIENT   DA NANG  
ISSUE 2
POPULATION INCREASE, PARTICULAR IMMIGRANT LABORS, INCREASES LOCAL SOCIAL ISSUES 
In Da Nang, urban infrastructure is overloaded, especially in populous areas. Critical stresses in crowded areas include traffic 
congestion, water shortage, neighborhood insecurity, lack of schools, and poor healthcare for children; addressing these 
stresses is a pressing task.

Results of a preliminary survey on labors show that immigrant labors share some common points: They mainly live in industrial 
zones of the city (especially in Lien Chieu District, accounting for 55%); women make up the largest proportion of this population, 
coming from Da Nang’s neighborhood areas; they mainly work in the industries of textile and garments, leather shoes, electronic 
components; their incomes stay low (from 1.4 to 2 million VND/month); they mainly rent modest rooms for accommodation which 
are not resilient to typhoons and floods.

Results of a survey among 150 officials/employers  show that there are issues around how local businesses use immigrant labor, 
including: (1) Young labors with high degrees and highly trained skills make up a significant and increasing proportion of the labor 
force (2.3% increase/year) but the city’s model of development does not depend heavily on this population; (2) Young 
labors face difficulties in securing appropriate jobs, affording daily costs and recreation activities, covering childcare expenses; 
(3) Most of the older labors and residents living in urbanized areas (aged 45-50) find it hard to find and adapt to new jobs due to 
changes in working time and regulations (especially males). 

When coupled with climate change, increasing disaster risks, and urban development, risks to vulnerable residents such as 
immigrant labors and poor households living in urbanized areas will increase.

ISSUE 3: 
CLIMATE CHANGE AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT IMPACTING INFRASTRUCTURE AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
Within Da Nang, urban expansion, infrastructure, and traffic investments have been prioritized, leading to risks of flooding and 
inundation in river basins near Quang Nam, and in downstream areas in Da Nang. In particular, in the past, urban development 
in low-lying areas and old flood drainage areas was promoted with no consideration for adaptation needs or solutions, creating 
a significant hazard-scape that will only increase in the future.

According to the Hydrology and Urban development simulation model (HUDSIM – ACCCRN), causes of floods in Da Nang 
include: Large flows from the upstream areas pouring into the floodplain while low-lying areas in the downstream of Da Nang 
do not have adequate water storage or drainage capacity; leveling grounds for urban development in low-lying areas in ways 
that reduce floodwater storage and drainage and/or constrict flows; construction and improvement of traffic routes in ways 
that block water flows; and a lack of flood drainage and floodwater storage solutions.

According to scenarios of climate change impacts on the South Central Coast, precipitation may increase by 1.5% in 2020 
relative to 1990s, and by 4.0% in 2050 relative to 1990. In addition, sea level rise will slow floodwater drainage. As a result, 
Da Nang’s flooding risk is projected to increase. 

Aside from water issues, climate change scenarios indicate that increases in temperatures will likely result in increased heat 
waves and prolonged droughts, which in turn will severely affect urban residents and infrastructure in the future.

It is estimated that 25% (or 29,981) of the homes in 
Da Nang are in moderate, bad or very bad condition.

Labor Market

Immigrant Laborer

Labors Suffering from Landuse 
Change and Resettlement

1. There are abundance of young 
    labors with high skill and 
    expertise 

2. Economic growth has created many 
    jobs, particularly in service, tourism
    and private sectors
3. The economic growth is largely 
    based on investment rather than 
    productivity
4. There is a slow change in the 
    proportion of the labor force. The 
    current ratio of undergraduate 
    degree and higher to college degree 
    to vocational degree is: 1- 0.3 -0.3
5. Job promotion service has been 
    established however it is not 
    developed well. The organization 
    to operate this service is not officially     
    created

1. It is difficult for high skill immigrant 
    labors to find a job in Da Nang 
   due to priority for local labors and 
   high competition

1. Young labors (under 45) in 
    this group are easy to adapt to new 
    working environment, however the 
    older ones cannot find new jobs easily

2. In some households, their living 
    largely depend on the compensation    
    from resettlement or selling their land

3. Female labors are willing to take 
    training courses for new jobs, 
    whereas male labors tend to work 
    on freelance jobs
 

2. Living condition of immigrant 
    labors in industrial zones is low

3. The economic growth is largely 
    based on investment rather than 
    productivity

4. Immigrant labors spend on large 
    percentage of their income for their 
    children’s schooling

5. Appropriate safe, hygienic 
   accommodation is among the major 
   concerns of immigrant labors

20

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

MOVING FROM STRATEGY TO ACTION

DA NANG’S KEY CHALLENGES & FOCUS AREAS

Health 

& Wellbeing

Economy 
& Society

Infrastructure 
& Environment

Leadership 
& Strategy

KEY FUTURE TRENDS THAT IMPACT FOCUS AREAS

Rapid 

Development 

Regional 

Urban Center 

Climate Change 
Impacts & Disasters

RESILIENCE STRATEGY OBJECTIVES

Da Nang 
Today 
2005-2016

Da Nang in 
the Future 
2017-2030

Resilience
Strategy  
Launch

ACTIONS

ACTIONS

ACTIONS

ACTIONS

KEY QUESTIONS STRATEGY ACTIONS MUST ANSWER
Based on the resilience analysis and the four principal resilience challenges facing Da Nang, the following questions should be asked

A) HOW TO REMOVE FEAR AND ANXIETY FROM PLACES WHERE RESIDENTS LIVE, WORK AND RECREATE?
1. How can the city create resident housing that is resilient to disasters such as typhoons and floods?
2. How can the city mobilize stakeholders to pro-actively build social security and life safety against disasters?
3. How can public space be leveraged to improve environmental quality and create places for recreation and social cohesion?
4. How can the city create effective early warning systems to alert residents of imminent severe weather events?

B) HOW TO DEVELOP A DYNAMIC, ROBUST, GLOBALLY INTEGRATED AND RESPONSIVE ECONOMY?
1. Which priority solutions can the city take to reduce unemployment caused by global economic development and climate change?
2. How should the city support local businesses to integrate and develop?
3. How can the city improve the quality of life and the livelihoods of people in urbanized and resettlement areas with the support of 
clean agriculture and high technology?

C) HOW TO DEVELOP INFRASTRUCTURE AND ECOSYSTEMS CAPABLE OF ADAPTING TO AND MITIGATING CLIMATE 
CHANGE IMPACTS AND SUPPORTING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT?
1. Which solutions should the city pursue to strengthen flood management in the southern part of the city?
2. What does the city need to do to create a roadmap of ecological and environmental adaptation and mitigation solutions that will 
    address future shocks and stresses?

D) HOW TO CREATE A CONNECTED INFORMATION COLLECTION AND DISSEMINATION SYSTEM THAT WILL SUPPORT 
EARLY WARNING FOR DISASTERS?
1. How can infrastructure systems and contingency plans be improved to address changing, increasing disaster risks?
2. How can the city improve its data collection and management to support disaster planning and response?
3. Which disaster planning and response mechanisms are local communities and businesses concerned with and 
    willing to participate in? 

RESILIENCE ANALYSIS TOOL

 NEED TO DO BETTER 

 DOING WELL, BUT CAN IMPROVE

AREA OF STRENGTH

22

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

4 - DA NANG RESILIENCE STRATEGY

Da Nang’s past challenge, current struggles, aspirational goals and rich history of resilience planning are encapsulated in its 
Resilience Strategy. Through the process of its resilience planning (see section 2), Da Nang has been able to develop key focus 
areas, specific strategy objectives (shown right) and a range of high-leverage strategy actions which are shown in the following section.

The following content has been discussed with technical departments and local experts over the course of three consultation meetings. 
In early 2016, Da Nang’s CRO first presented the city’s draft Resilience Strategy to the Vice Chairman of Da Nang People’s Committee 
and the city’s Steering Committee. Feedback and comments have been incorporated into the final document and the revised strategy 
actions that follow.

#1 -  A PEACEFUL CITY 
A city that removes fear and anxiety from places 
where residents live, work and recreate. 
#2 -  A DYNAMIC CITY 
A city with dynamic economy in partnership with 
people and business to meet needs in a changing 
world.
#3 -  A PREPARED CITY
A city with infrastructure systems which can 
recover, and be well prepared for challenges in 
development process.
#4 -  A CONNECTED CITY
A city where knowledge is driven by meaningful 
information sharing.

LEGEND
DA NANG’S APPLIED RESILIENCE VALUES

REDUCE

VULNERABILITY
+ EXPOSURE

ENSURE SAFETY,
COMMUNITY HEALTH 

+  PROTECT LIFE

INTEGRATE 
PLANNING  +
MANAGEMENT 

PLANS 

MAINTAIN 

BASIC SERVICES 

+ CRITICAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE

MITIGATE 

FLOOD IMPACTS
IN LOW-LYING  

AREAS

IMPROVE 
LANDSCAPE 
+  ECOLOGY

MAINTAIN
RELIABLE

COMMUNICATION

SYSTEM

SECURE
ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT

MAINTAIN
LEADERSHIP
+ EFFECTIVE
MANAGEMENT

ENHANCE

SUSTAINABILITY
+ SOCIAL WELFARE

ENHANCE 

COMMUNITY IDENTITY, 
SUPPORT + DIVERSE 

LIVELIHOOD

STRENGTHEN
+ ENHANCE 
THE ROLE OF
STAKEHOLDERS

24

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

STRATEGY 1 
A PEACEFUL CITY
A city that removes 
fear and anxiety from 
places where residents 
live, work and recreate. 

STRATEGY #1 SHORT-TERM OBJECTIVE

The city will promote basic services for residents’ safety against disasters

STRATEGY #1 LONG- TERM OBJECTIVE

The city and communities will have adequate capacity to become more resilient 
and recover against shocks and stresses

DETAILED OBJECTIVES

•Improving housing quality, resilient to storms

•Ensuring spare financial resources for disaster response

• Improving employment and livelihoods

• Improving daily life environment 

• Ensuring the safety against disasters of community

LIST OF ACTIONS:

• ACTION 1.1    Expanding loan supports for community to build/ repair housing resilient to storms 

• ACTION 1.2    Scaling up, integrating the technical material when building storm-resistant housing

• ACTION 1.3    Assessing the city’s housing vulnerability exposed to storms 

• ACTION 1.4    Integrate climate change mitigation into housing sector

• ACTION 1.5    Conducting analysis on financial risks and insurance mechanism for disaster responses

• ACTION 1.6    Research and pilot insurance mechanism for disaster resilient housing

• ACTION 1.7    Promote outreach, training, awareness and education to increase community resilience

• ACTION 1.8    Promoting supports and sponsors of different donors for disaster and climate change response in the community

26

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

STRATEGY 1 A PEACEFUL CITY 

EXISTING PROGRAMS THAT SUPPORT HOUSING IN DA NANG

National Programs

City Programs

ODA/Foreign Aided Programs

The government’s VND30 trillion loan 

package for low-cost housing

The program 48 (Decision 48/TTg) in 

Hoa Vang Rural District

Storm-resistant housing projects

• From 2013-2016 (State budget)

• Conducted in the form of incentives for  

  low-income housing loans

• Low-income households joining the 

  program need approval of municipal DOC

• 2014-2016 (State budget via Vietnam Bank for 

  Social Policies)

• Conducted to support building and repairing 
  407 houses for the poor in Hoa Vang so that 

  they can resist to storms and floods

• 2008-2013 (budget from WB).

• Providing housing microfinance 
  consisting of 1 million-worth loans

• Subsidy = 12,000,000 VND

• Interest = 12% per annum

• 70% provided to ordinary housing buyers, 

  the other 30% provided to investors
• As a social housing project which has 

  been approved

• Loan = 15,000,000 VND

• Repayment rate of almost 100 %

• Loan term = 10 years.

ACCCRN Program

ACTIONS AND INITIATIVES
1. ACTION 1.1
 EXPANDING LOAN SUPPORTS FOR COMMUNITY TO BUILD/ REPAIR HOUSING RESILIENT TO STORMS 
Storm-resistant housing funding managed by the city Women’s Union will be maintained in relation to results of the project scaling-up 
study of ADB. Now demands for loans of housing building of the poor and the near poor stay high. Thus, the increase in funding access 
for them to build storm-resistant housing is essential and necessary.  This is a key actions that is conducted in small scale and needs to 
be scaled up.

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS

TIME

Based on study results of ADB*, mobilization for loans is recommended, specifically:
Discussing demands for credit loans for storm-resistant housing 2016-2020 with financial units such as ADB, WB
Discussing the possibility of mobilization of local funds in scaling up storm-resistant housing with relevant munici-
pal departments and agencies
The main action will be conducted when loan funding is developed.

Coastal, riverside districts and high mountainous areas
CCCO
100RC, ISET
DOF, DONRE, Da Nang Women’s Union, VN Central Committee of Fatherland Front of Da Nang, ADB, NDF, WB 
and other financial organizations
2017-2025

• Total ground area 70m2

• Suitable for financial status of the poor

• 2011-2014

• With low and stable interest 
   = 5% per annum (in 10 years).

• Each loan supports 50% of total cost 

  of a house

• Concerned with storm-resistant housing

• Interest = 7.8% per annum

• House design and consultation fees 

  = 1,000,000VND/household

• Up to 2016: over 400 households access 

  the loans (poor and near poor)

DEMAND FOR HOUSING FINANCE (CREDIT)  FROM 2016-2020 IN VIETNAMESE DONG (VND)

Estimated Demand

City Capacity

Remaining Need

Number of Houses

29,981 Houses

(5,996 Houses/Year)

2,647 Houses

(530 Houses/Year)

27,433 Houses

(5,466 Houses/Year)

Finance Demand

1,026 billion VND

(205 billion VND/Year)

90 billion VND

(18 billion VND/Year)

936 billion VND

(187 billion VND/Year)

* Technical report on “Undertaking feasibility study for scaling-up the model of storm resistant housing for a resilient Da Nang City” Prepared by 
the Institute for Social and Environmental Transition & Da Nang Department of Foreign Affairs

28

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

POTENTIAL FUNDING FOR SCALING UP STORM-RESISTANT HOUSING

Fund for 
the poor

Fund for 
disaster 
control

Category
Operation and management 
costs of housing microfinance
Cover for the difference 
between the interest rate of the 
state and outside interest rate

Consultation/Design fees 

Housing insurance 

Women 

Development 

Fund

Vietnam 

Environment 
Protection 

Fund

2. ACTION 1.2
SCALE UP, INTEGRATE TECHNICAL MATERIAL WHEN BUILDING STORM-RESISTANT HOUSING
Between 2013 and 2016, the city implemented Degree No.48/NĐ-CP and promulgated Decision No.9002/QĐ-UBND on a 
storm-resistant housing program. However, this program has been conducted in Hoa Vang only. The technical material for building 
storm-resistant housing has not been widely announced, yet it needs to be scaled up and shared with a wide audience.  This is a 
supportive action that was conducted and has ended and needs to be scaled up.

Conducting actions based on official responsibilities of DOC and PCs of districts:
Existing related regulations will be reviewed and considered; design drawings and basic construction 
guidance for community use will be finalized
Cooperate with and hand over deliverables to local units such as districts, wards/communes
Organizing training courses for local units

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS

TIME

The city
DOC
ISET and other organizations
The Steering Committee for Natural Disaster Prevention, Search and Rescue, Da Nang Women’s Union, People’s 
Committees of districts
2017-2020

3. ACTION 1.3 
ASSESS THE CITY’S HOUSING EXPOSURE TO STORMS TO PRODUCE DISASTER ADAPTATION PLANS
During the development of the four Focus Areas, a Feasibility and Demonstration study of a Visual Climate Adaptation Platform (VCAP) 
was conducted by the CSIRO and the Da Nang CRO technical team from March to June 2016. The study assessed the exposure and 
vulnerability of the current residential housing in two wards (Tho Quang and Hoa Hai; subjected to wind storms). Impact levels, risks 
and costs were identified. The city needs to further investigate, collect housing data, and then to assess the feasibility of scalling up. 
This is a supportive action and would initially apply VCAP to produce disaster risk reduction and adaptation plans (also see Strategy 4).

Conducting official tasks in storm and flood control
Collecting data on current status of housing in GIS maps, and damages caused by historical disasters
Preparing necessary steps and resources for setting up VCAP for Da Nang
Consulting for necessity and resources for development of a vulnerability map of housing damages due to wind 
storms of the city 
Evaluating VCAP’s application in housing quality management

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

The city
The Steering Committee for Natural Disaster Prevention, Search and Rescue
100RC, CSIRO
CCCO, DARD, DOLISA, DOC
2017-2018

4. ACTION 1.4 
INTEGRATE CLIMATE CHANGE MITIGATION INTO THE HOUSING SECTOR
There is huge potential to reduce GHG emissions in households in Da Nang. The “Building Energy Accelerator” (BEA) program 
conducted by WRI will analyze and provide a wide range of potential solutions to reduce GHG in the building and housing sector. 
BEA program results will provide the basis for replication at the city scale. This is a supportive action and new initiative.

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

In the first phase, several activities will be conducted within the BEA program, including:
Conduct an assessment of current energy efficiency, and propose relevant solutions
Develop a roadmap for solution implementation
Conduct consultation meetings

Citywide
CCCO
100RC, WRI
DOC, DTC, DIT, Office of Committee for Storm and Flood management
2017-2020

30

RESILIENT   DA NANG  
5. ACTION 1.5 
CONDUCT AN ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL RISKS AND INSURANCE MECHANISM FOR DISASTER RESPONSES
Under current regulations, local budgets allocate a 2% reserve for corrective work following a disaster. Therefore, the city should 
organize analysis to ensure the availability of financial resources, to more actively respond to disasters. Disaster risk finance solutions 
include contingent annual budget, insurance mechanism, preserved credit, financial aid after disaster. This is a key action 
and new initiative. 

ACTIONS

Several activities will be integrated within the WBG and GFDRR programs
Collect information , conduct financial risk analysis, and propose relevant solutions

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Citywide
DoF
WBG  and GFDRR, Swiss Re, and other organizations
Relevant city departments
2017-2020

DRFIP aims to enhance financial resilience, thereby reducing expense and minimizing recovery time after disasters. To achieve this 
objective, DRFIP provides consultation and analysis tools, and solutions for recovery and disaster risk reduction.  Expected results 
from DRFIP: Analysis of financial preparedness and resource mobilize solutions for disaster response.

6. ACTION 1.6
RESEARCH AND PILOT INSURANCE MECHANISMS FOR DISASTER RESILIENT HOUSING
Insurance mechanism is a useful financial tool to preserve an alternative funding for post disaster response. Swiss Re has provided 
analysis and a tentative insurance mechanism for housing sector in Da Nang to be proactive to natural disaster. This is a key action 
and new initiative.

Combined with Action 1.1 in mobilizing loans for the Storm resistant Housing Project
Collaborate with financial institutions such as ADB, WB to develop a housing insurance mechanism
Negotiate with municipal departments to utilize disaster prevention funds to subsidize insurance premium pay-
ments
Consult with relevant stakeholders
Pilot the insurance mechanisms (for 500 houses).

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Citywide
CCCO
100RC, Swiss Re, VINARE, financial institutions
DoF, Woman Union, Office of Committee for Storm and Flood management
2017-2020

Da Nang is considering a parametric insurance mechanism for storm resistant 
housing in the city. This concept was proposed by Swiss Re in May 2016.

32

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

7. ACTION 1.7
PROMOTE OUTREACH, TRAINING, AWARENESS AND EDUCATION TO INCREASE COMMUNITY RESILIENCE
Communication program including training and workshops on climate change and natural disaster reduction has been conducted 
widely by city departments. In the coming time, it is necessary to build and provide basic knowledge, skills, and practices for community 
so that they can response and provide mutual supports during disasters. This is supportive action and ongoing activity that needs to be 
scaled up.

Conduct training and communication on critical knowledge and skills for community 
Conduct training on resilience for students and workers in industrial zones
Develop piloting model
Develop guidance materials

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Citywide
Relevant city departments
International and National Donors
Other city departments
2017-2025

7. ACTION 1.8
PROMOTING DONOR SUPPORT FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND DISASTER RESPONSE IN THE COMMUNITY 
International and national donor support has been and continues to be fundamental to preparing for and responding to disaster in 
Vietnam. For example, in 2015-2016, the Akzo Nobel Company provided materials and labors to repaint social houses and community 
buildings. The city would like to increase and scale up such contributions. This is supportive action and ongoing activity that needs to 
be scaled up.

ACTIONS

Promote the support and sponsorship for poor communities affected by disasters
Enhance the awareness and involvement of private sector in responding to disasters

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Hoa Vang District and coastal communes
DoFA
100RC, ISET, International and National Donors
Municipal departments, District people’s committee, CCCO, Office of Committee for Storm and Flood management
2017-2025

“HUMAN CITIES” INITIATIVE
REPAINTING STORM RESISTANT HOUSING SPONSORED BY AKZO NOBEL (2015-2016)
Akzo Nobel is a Dutch company which is a leading global paint and coating company and a major producer of specialty chemicals. 
In Viet Nam, Akzo Nobel is well known for two products of Dulux and Maxilite. In 2014, Akzo Nobel launched the “Human Cities” 
Initiative, focusing in six areas, including: Colorfulness, Heritage, Education, Sport, Transportation, and Sustainable Development. 
Within the scope 100RC Initiative, Akzo Nobel has provide the material for 100 storm resistant houses and two community buildings 
in Da Nang city.  This also relates to actions in Strategy 2 (Diversifying livelihood), Strategy 3 (Improving living environment) and 
Strategy 4 (Ensuring safety of community against natural disasters) which are presented in the following sections.

34

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

STRATEGY 2 
A DYNAMIC CITY 

A city with dynamic 
economy in partnership 
with people and business 
to meet needs in a 
changing world 

STRATEGY #2 SHORT-TERM OBJECTIVE

Da Nang creates diverse job opportunities and livelihood; local businesses are well supported to be proactive 
for integration; living condition of marginalized residents are improved through easy access to abundant jobs 

STRATEGY #1 LONG- TERM OBJECTIVE

The city creates a dynamic economy, maintains close cooperation among government, businesses and residents

DETAILED OBJECTIVES

• Enhance communication between government, businesses, and labors

• Create an efficient environment for production and trade, improve living environment and social welfare 

• Diversify the job market to improve living conditions for marginalized labors

LIST OF ACTIONS:

• ACTION 2.1    Building and managing online database of labor market

• ACTION 2.2    Conducting dialogues on policies related to labor, payment, recruitment, and training

• ACTION 2.3    Piloting the distribution channels for organic products

• ACTION 2.4    Research on “Uber model for tourism and services”

• ACTION 2.5    Creating favorable conditions for children of workers in industrial zone to attend school

• ACTION 2.6    Revitalizing open spaces (park, foot path) at high density residential area

• ACTION 2.7    Dialogues on investment attraction regarding globally economic integration

36

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

STRATEGY 2 A DYNAMIC CITY 

ACTIONS AND INITIATIVES

1. ACTION 2.1
 BUILD AND MANAGE A LABOR MARKET ONLINE DATABASE 
In-depth interviews with businesses indicate a lack of conversation between businesses and labors. To address this problem, it is 
necessary to connect businesses and labors through an online database of labor demand and supply. The database should also house 
information on training, recruitment, and policies related to labor, salary, and support so that labors and employer can find relevant 
resources for their needs. This is a key action and new initiative.

Build online database (investigate, develop the structure of the database, consult with different stakeholders, 
develop manual)
Publicize the database
Review and update annually

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Citywide
DoLISA
To be identified
DISED, DIC, Consultating firms
2017-2020

2. ACTION 2.2
CONDUCT POLICY DIALOGUES RELATED TO LABOR, SALARIES, RECRUITMENT, AND TRAINING 
The city of Da Nang needs to organize series of dialogues to communicate labor policies and inform revision of job training plans and 
programs. This is a key action and new initiative.

ACTIONS

Assess how businesses implement labor policies 
Convene dialogues engaging wide range of stakeholders

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Citywide
DoLISA
To be identified
DISED, Management board of Industrial Zones, District People’s Committee
2017-2020

Startup business activity in Da Nang.

	  

	  

38

RESILIENT   DA NANG  
3. ACTION 2.3
 DEVELOP DISTRIBUTION CHANNEL FOR ORGANIC PRODUCTS
Currently, the city government is developing Da Nang into a “4 Safeties” city, including safe traffic, safe community, safe food and good 
social welfare. To achieve safe food, it is necessary to create a distribution channel to provide healthy organic products to community. 
This model also provide job and improve livelihood for people who are affected by urbanization. This is a key action and pilot initiative 
that needs to be promoted.

Conduct survey, develop proposal for “Distribution channel for organic product project”
Pilot the model: collaborate with producers, invest facilities and organize the market
Evaluate the effectiveness of the model; scale up if successful

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

City center area
DARD
To be identified
DISED, DIT, DoH, PC at district level
2017-2020

Agricultural production in Hoa Vang district, 
New Rural Area program, June 2016

4. ACTION 2.4
RESEARCH ON “UBER MODEL FOR TOURISM AND SERVICES”
Da Nang aims to be a tourism and service city, in particular to meet high demand in logistic and supportive services. To support this 
goal, the city will conduct research and pilot a tourism service hub model where information is provided connecting supply and demand 
sides, with the intent to create more job opportunities. This is a support action and new initiative.

Conduct survey and develop a pilot model
Mobilize funding for piloting
Pilot the model, assess and replicate if successful

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Inner city areas
DOT
To be identified
DISED, DOLISA,Tourism association, District People’s committee
2017-2020

5. ACTION 2.5
CREATE FAVORABLE CONDITIONS FOR CHILDREN OF WORKERS IN INDUSTRIAL ZONES TO ATTEND SCHOOL
Based on the assessment on living condition in industrial zones, there is significant need to improve living condition for workers. The 
highest priority is to improve the learning environment of workers’ children. Currently, Da Nang is implementing a 3.8 mil USD project, 
“Centre for kindergarten education and care” sponsored by Half the Sky Foundation, to benefit the children of industrial zone workers.
 This is a key action and ongoing activity that needs to be scaled up.

In the short term, implement the “Centre for kindergarten education and care” project
Assess the effectiveness of the project
Develop a roadmap for replication citywide

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Industrial zones
DoET
Half the Sky Foundation (US)
DoFA, PC of Lien Chieu District
2016-2020

40

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

HALF THE SKY FOUNDATION (USA)
THE “CENTRE FOR KINDERGARTEN EDUCATION AND CARE – ONE SKY” 
Half the Sky Foundation is an US NGO focusing on replicable health care and 
kindergarten education to improve quality of life for vulnerable children.

This project provides the first international standard kindergarten school in Viet Nam, 
piloted by Half the Sky foundation. The primary beneficiaries will be the children of 
industrial zone workers.

This 3-year, 3.8 million USD project will be implemented from 2016 to 2019 in the 
Hong Phuoc Residential area (Hoa Khanh Bac Ward, Lien Chieu district). 3.5 million 
USD of funding comes from Half the Sky Foundation; the remainder is covered by 
Da Nang city.

6. ACTION 2.6
REVITALIZE COMMUNITY SPACES IN HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL AREAS
A key social challenge in Da Nang is the shortage of community spaces and social services in high density areas. This is a supportive 
action and new initiative.  

In the short term, the Social Cohesion Challenge initiated by 100RC will be implemented, the development of 
community open space in Nai Hien Dong community will be piloted.
For other areas, surveys will be conducted to determine the current status of and demand for open spaces, 
including kindergarten school, parks, foot paths, etc., particularly in the Cam Le and Lien Chieu Districts.
Based on survey results, proposals will be developed to transform currently abandoned or unused industrial zone 
areas into community open space assets.

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Industrial zones or high density residential areas
DoC
100RC, Citimart
CCCO, DISED, People’s Committee of Son Tra, Lien Chieu, Cam Le
2017-2020

SOCIAL COHESION CHALLENGE
INITIATED BY 100 RC WITH SUPPORT FROM CITIMART
100 RC initiated the Social Cohesion Challenge with the support of Citimart, which aims to help cities in 100RC network deeply 
understand their social challenges, connect to different solution providers globally, and develop innovative solutions to enhance 
social cohesion. One of the key social challenges identified in Da Nang is the lack of community open spaces. For the Social 
Cohesion Challenge, Da Nang has selected to pilot the development of community open space in Nai Hien Dong community.

7. ACTION 2.7
INCREASE DIALOGUE ON INVESTMENT ATTRACTION AND GLOBAL ECONOMIC INTEGRATION
Da Nang frequently conducts promotion events to attract foreign investment. International and national dialogue should be increased to 
attract greater investment, promote global economic integration, and enhance the economy of Da Nang. This is a supportive action and  
ongoing activity that needs to be supported.

ACTIONS

Implement the “Central Focused Economic Zone” Program in Da Nang
Organize Economic and Investment Forums 

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Citywide
DPI
100RC
CCCO, DISED, DDIF, relevant units
2017-2025

Typical open space near an apartment in Da Nang.

	  

42

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

STRATEGY 3 
A PREPARED CITY 

A city with infrastructure 
systems which can recover, 
and be well prepared for 
challenges in development 
process.

STRATEGY #1 SHORT-TERM OBJECTIVE

Ecological and environmental solutions will be integrated into urban plan, development and management

STRATEGY #1 LONG- TERM OBJECTIVE

Da Nang city embeds multi-benefit solutions to create healthy ecological environment, and to improve community health,towards 
sustainable development

DETAILED OBJECTIVES

 
• Maintain, protect, and recover the natural buffer and water retention to increase the flood drainage capacity

• Plan, develop urban infrastructures and environmental services for climate change adaptation and mitigation

• Enhance safety and living condition of hazard prone communities; related to Strategy 1

• Enhance inter-regional, multidisciplinary solutions in urban and environmental management (flood, drought and pollution)

LIST OF ACTIONS:

• ACTION 3.1    Expand floodwater drainage corridors and develop mechanisms to manage and restore these corridors

• ACTION 3.2    Assessing flooding risk in new urbanized areas

• ACTION 3.3    Adjust the detailed plans which potentially impact drainage capacity

• ACTION 3.4    Restructuring the urban design in high flood prone areas (long term objective)

• ACTION 3.5    Resettling residential areas which are located in flooding plain or frequently affected by flood (short term adaptation)

• ACTION 3.6   Developing the model of flood resilient community (short term adaptation)

• ACTION 3.7   Research on energy efficiency in buildings (GHG mitigation)

• ACTION 3.8   Research on Quang Nam – Da Nang interregional river basin plan

• ACTION 3.9   Research on regional urban plan and management mechanism

• ACTION 3.10  GHG mitigation in wastes treatment sector and tourism services

• ACTION 3.11  Implementing the “Green Utility Network” in water supply sector

• ACTION 3.12  Develop monitoring and early warning systems for flood risk 

44

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

STRATEGY 3 A PREPARED CITY 

ACTIONS AND INITIATIVES

1. ACTION 3.1
EXPAND FLOODWATER DRAINAGE CORRIDORS AND DEVELOP MECHANISMS TO MANAGE AND RESTORE THEM
There is no current planning around maintaining flood corridors along major rivers in Da Nang. Urbanization runs all the way to the 
river bank to maximize development area, leaving no space for floodwaters. New urban areas are developed on the floodplain without 
consideration of drainage impacts. Development and redevelopment plans need to widen the flood corridor and increase the drainage 
capacity of the Vu Gia – Han river basin. This is a key action and new initiative.

Research and design technical solutions for the flood corridor
When developing new sites, clearly identify flood corridor borders 
Periodically dredge lakes and rivers 
Develop policy for river and drainage system management and protection

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Southern area of Da Nang
DoC
International and national donors and consultants
IUP, DARD, DoNRE
2017-2025

2. ACTION 3.2
ASSESS FLOOD RISK IN NEW URBANIZED AREAS
There is currently no legal requirement for integrated flood risk assessment in urban planning. This is a supportive action and 
new initiative.

Collect data, information on available assessment approaches
Update the data on urban development; predict flood risk using existing hydrological simulation model.
Develop policy mechanisms for disaster risk assessment, including flood risk assessment in new urbanized areas.
Develop guidance for integrating risk assessment into urban planning
Request People’s Committee issue policies, regulations on risk assessment
Enhance planning staff capacity for risk assessment
Assess the flood risk in new urbanized area
Propose relevant solutions

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Citywide
DoC
To be identify
IUP, DARD, DoNRE, CCCO, District People’s committee 
2017-2025

46

RESILIENT   DA NANG  
3. ACTION 3.3
ADJUST PLANS WHICH POTENTIALLY IMPACT DRAINAGE CAPACITY
Urbanization, development on islands and construction of embankment has significantly obstructed river flows in Da Nang. This is 
exacerbated by floodplain transport infrastructure, which has been developed without consideration of drainage. Drainage systems in 
the old quarter are degraded with reduced capacity. This is a supportive action and new initiative.

4. ACTION 3.4
RESTRUCTURE THE URBAN DESIGN IN HIGH FLOOD PRONE AREAS 
Rapid urbanization, particularly in the peri-urban and southern areas of the city that occupy natural water retentions areas, has been 
increasing impervious surface area, restricting drainage, replacing water retention area, and exacerbating city flood risk. This is a 
supportive, long-term adaptive action and new initiative.

Research and develop a land use plan for drainage
Designate ground level for new developed areas (i.e. depth of fill used for new construction)
Redesign transport routes that impact drainage, incorporating overpasses and other design features to allow 
appropriate water passage
Transform flood sensitive area into green spaces
Develop and issue regulations and technical guidance on leveling and developing park and green buffer areas
Identify development areas adjacent to flood corridors and issue regulations concerning flood risk remedies for 
these properties

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

Identify areas of inefficient land use and/or land degradation.
Re-plan toward efficient land use and increasing green space, water retention and pervious area
Create a redevelopment roadmap to replace currently inefficient land use areas with high density, well equipped 
buildings
Adjust land use plans to reduce flood risk
Provide incentives for the redevelopment of ineffectively used areas

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Southern area 
DoC
International and national donors and consultants
IUP, DARD, DoNRE, CCCO, District People’s Committee
2017-2025

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Southern and Northwest areas
DoC
International and national consultants and donors (to be identified)
IUP, DARD, DoNRE, CCCO, District People’s Committee
2020-2030

5. ACTION 3.5
RESETTLE RESIDENTIAL AREAS THAT ARE LOCATED IN THE FLOOD PLAIN OR FREQUENTLY AFFECTED BY FLOOD
To ensure the safety of communities, it is necessary to relocate and resettle residential areas that are developed in the flood plain or 
frequently affected by flooding.  This is a supportive and ongoing short-term adaptive action that needs to be promoted.

Identify flood prone, frequently impacted areas 
Identify resettlement areas with low disaster risk
Adjust the social housing strategy to take into consideration resettlement demand
Provide support and incentives for households in high-risk areas to relocate and resettle

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Southern area
DARD
International and national consultants and donors (to be identified)
DoC, DoNRE, District People’s Committee
2017-2020

48

RESILIENT   DA NANG  
6. ACTION 3.6
DEVELOP A MODEL FOR DA NANG FLOOD RESILIENT COMMUNITIES 
For a variety of reasons, some high risk areas cannot be resettled or relocated. These areas need to be well prepared for flood 
adaptation and response. Any model developed should correlate with Strategy 4 –  a model of effective natural disaster response 
based on the community. This is a supportive action, short-term adaptation and new initiative.

Design and publicize flood resilient housing designs
Develop and publicize flood resilient housing technical guidance
Provide training to increase flood response capacity for communities
Provide incentives to build flood resilient housing
Develop and publicize preparedness plans
Conduct research on livelihood diversification options and strategies
Create community groups to provide support and rescue in case of emergency
Build multi-function community safe houses

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Southern areas
DARD
International and national consultants and donors (to be identified)
IUP, DoC, DoLISA, District People’s Committee
2018-2025

7. ACTION 3.7
RESEARCH ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN BUILDINGS TO MITIGATE GREENHOUSE GAS (GHG) EMISSIONS
Energy efficiency is one of the most important components of sustainable development. Da Nang needs to learn from the Building 
Efficiency Accelerator project and apply successful solutions across the whole city. This is a key action and new initiative.

In first phase, implement the Building Efficiency Accelerator sponsored by WRI (USA)
Conduct survey, data collection and assessment
Propose solutions and scale up if successful

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Citywide
CCCO
100RC, WRI
DPI, DIT, DoNRE
2017-2025

“BUILDING EFFICIENCY ACCELERATOR”
A PROGRAM FROM THE WORLD RESOURCES INSTITUTE 
“Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL) which aims to achieve three objectives 
by 2030, including doubling the global rate of improvement in energy 
efficiency was initiated by UN Secretary General Ban Ki Moon and the 
Director of the World Bank, Jim Yong Kim, in 2011. At the Climate Change 
Summit in 2014, SE4ALL launched a platform partner program, the Global 
Energy Efficiency Accelerator Platform, comprised of 6 components: 
buildings, lightning, appliances, district energy systems, industry and 
transport. Da Nang has been selected as one of 6 global “deep dive” cities 
which the BEA partnership has committed to concertedly supporting in 2017.

The Building Efficiency Accelerator (BEA) program executed by the World 
Resources Institute (WRI) is one of the partner efforts of SE4ALL. The goal 
of BEA is to support municipalities in energy efficiency policy development 
and practical adaption and implementation of energy efficiency technology 
solutions, thus accelerating building energy efficiency.

8. ACTION 3.8
RESEARCH ON QUANG NAM – DA NANG INTERREGIONAL RIVER BASIN PLAN
Many hydro power plants have been and are being built in the upstream of Vu Gia Thu Bon river basin.  Da Nang is affected by 
these upstream activities due to its location; in particular, hydropower plant operations have the potential to significantly exacerbate 
or mitigate flood, water scarcity and saline intrusion issues. Unfortunately, the operation and management of the hydropower plants 
is currently not coordinated or executed well. Da Nang and Quang Nam have signed an MOU to mutually support and collaborate in 
resource management, environmental management, and climate change response. One of the key objectives is to request the Central 
Government to establish a River Basin Organization (RBO) for the Vu Gia Thu Bon basin. This is a supportive action and new initiative.

Conduct dialogues between Da Nang and Quang Nam to discuss policy, mechanisms, and a working model for a 
regional organization that executes and directs the water resource use and management in the Vu Gia Thu Bon 
river basin.
Conduct research on financial mechanism to maintain the operation of the RBO.
In first phase, conduct activities within the Global Resilience Partnership (GRP) project (led by ISET)

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Quang Nam province and Da Nang city
DoNRE and DARD
ISET, International and national consultants and donors (to be identified)
CCCO, DISED and other related departments
2017-2025

50

RESILIENT   DA NANG  
9. ACTION 3.9
RESEARCH ON REGIONAL URBAN PLAN AND MANAGEMENT MECHANISM
Upstream activities can increase disaster risk in Da Nang due to its downstream location. Integrated management through bilateral 
cooperation mechanism between Da Nang and Quang Nam is needed for development and urban management. This is a supportive 
action and new initiative.

Conduct survey, research on regional plan
Develop the regional plan and management mechanism
Conduct dialogue, and implementation

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Upper Vu Gia Thu Bon river basin
DOC
ISET, International and national consultants and donors (to be identified)
DARD, DoNRE, other related organizations
2017-2025

10. ACTION 3.10
GHG MITIGATION IN WASTE TREATMENT AND TOURISM SERVICES SECTORS
Upstream activities can increase disaster risk in Da Nang due to its downstream location. Integrated management through bilateral 
cooperation mechanism between Da Nang and Quang Nam is needed for development and urban management. This is a supportive 
action and new initiative.

Prioritized proposals:
1. Transform Khanh Son landfill (old one) in to park or zoo (the landfill has been closed)
2. Solid waste classification at source
3. Solid waste treatment complex, including: recycling module, composting, energy collecting from incineration,   
    hazardous waste classification and treatment 
4. GHG inventory for manufacturing and service sector
5. Using solar energy systems for service and tourism sectors
6. Waste water collection and treatment to minimize pollution at beaches 

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA(S)
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Waste treatment facilities and sewage systems
DoNRE
ISET, International and national consultants and donors (to be identified)
DoC, Waste water management and treatment company, URENCO
2017-2030

11. ACTION 3.11
IMPLEMENT THE “GREEN UTILITY NETWORK” IN THE WATER SUPPLY SECTOR
Water supply is one of the vulnerable sectors affected by climate change. Based on the report of “Water resource management project” 
(ACCCRN 2015), Da Nang need to strengthen the management and operation of water supply facilities, and adaptive capacity of water 
supply facilities to increasing climate change. Da Nang Water Supply Company (DAWACO), in collaboration with Vitens Evides 
International (VEI), conducts research to increase the resilience of water supply sector and reduce the GHG emission from operation.
By this cooperation, DAWACO also take part in the Green Utility Network. This is a supportive action and new initiative.

Conduct primary inventory to assess the energy and material efficiency
Develop the Climate change action plan (CCAP) for water supply sector
Share the results with international and national partners

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Water supply system
DAWACO
Vitens Evides International (VEI)
Relevant city departments, CCCO
2016-2017

12. ACTION 3.12
DEVELOP MONITORING AND EARLY WARNING SYSTEMS FOR FLOOD RISK (DETAILED IN ACTION 4.7) 
Detail is provided in “Strategy 4,” action 4.7 regarding investments in hydro-meteorology monitoring and early warning system for flood, 
flash flood and reservoir breakdown.

52

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

STRATEGY 4 
A CONNECTED CITY 

A city where knowledge 
is driven by meaningful 
information sharing.

STRATEGY #1 SHORT-TERM OBJECTIVE

Da Nang city proactively and inclusively enhances the use of communication systems for disaster management

STRATEGY #1 LONG- TERM OBJECTIVE

Data and resources are secured for proactive response to shocks and stresses

DETAILED OBJECTIVES

 
• Strengthen data and communications infrastructure for disaster management.

• Enhance the capacity of city officers in natural disaster early warning.

• Engage communities around information communication for disaster management.

• Secure the safety of communities against natural disasters 

LIST OF ACTIONS:

• ACTION 4.1    Strengthen the Disaster Management Center 

• ACTION 4.2    Applying crisis management system – CMS in flood management and response

• ACTION 4.3    Assessing the vulnerability of housing to storm using VCAP 

• ACTION 4.4    Strengthen the database and infrastructures for disaster management

• ACTION 4.5    Improving the action plans for typhoon prevention, response, and recovery

• ACTION 4.6.   Enhancing capacity for city officers in analyzing data for natural disaster forecasting and warning

• ACTION 4.7    Investing in hydro-meteorology monitoring and early warning system for flood, flash flood  and reservoir breakdown  

• ACTION 4.8    Applying IT in inclusively collecting and communicating disaster information

• ACTION 4.9    Developing an inclusive communication system with diverse communication channels

54

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

STRATEGY 4 A CONNECTED CITY 

ACTIONS AND INITIATIVES

1. ACTION 4.1
STRENGTHEN THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT CENTER 
Currently, DMC is moderately equipped and resourced for disaster management. Further investment is needed in facilities (equipment, 
data) and human resources that meet the demands of disaster management (database systems, warning infrastructure) in the future. 
This is a key action, ongoing activity and needs to be promoted.

Review the policies and regulations governing the function and mandate of DMC.
Assess current operation, human resources, capacity, and infrastructure for disaster management. 
Develop a proposal to strengthen the DMC
Mobilize funding and support for capacity enhancement and facility investment

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Citywide
Office of Disaster Management and Rescue Committee
International and national consultants and donors (to be identified)
DARD, Center for Hydro and Meteorology Forecasting in Central Vietnam
2017-2020

2. ACTION 4.2
APPLYING CRISIS MANAGEMENT SYSTEM – CMS IN FLOOD MANAGEMENT AND RESPONSE 
Da Nang has recently developed guidance on disaster response, including the function and mandate of involved stakeholders. 
Effective communication with key decision makers is identified as a key element of efficient response.  Based on this guidance, the 
Office of Committee for Storm and Flood Management has developed a series of flood response scenarios and for each, has assigned 
responsibilities to key decision makers at different levels. It is necessary to conduct drills on these scenarios. This is a supportive action 
and should scale-up to a pilot program.

Pilot the CMS in a commune in Hoa Vang district (develop the scenario, update the tool, conduct a drill)
Conduct workshop to assess the result and potential for replication (if successful) 
Scale up and maintain

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Hoa Vang District
Office of Committee for flood and storm management
100RC, 3S, other organizations
DIC, Committee for flood and storm management at district level, CCCO
2017-2020

56

RESILIENT   DA NANG  
3. ACTION 4.3
ASSESS HOUSING STORM VULNERABILITY USING VCAP 
The CSIRO Visual Climate Adaptation Platform (VCAP) can be effectively used as a tool to support the development of an integrated 
strategy on climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction. Based on the piloting study conducted by CSIRO and technical 
team in Da Nang (see Action 1.3), VCAP can potentially be scaled up to 56 wards/communes to assess the vulnerability of residential 
housing against wind storms. This is a supportive action that should scale-up to a pilot program.

In short term: collect the data on attributes of houses, historical damages due to storms, and consider necessary 
skills, resources, and governance requirements in applying VCAP to assess the vulnerability
In long term: develop proposals for a full VCAP project in Da Nang in collaboration with the CSIRO, including:  
- Identify the scope of the project (sectors and areas that will be involved)
- Assess the vulnerability and the potential impacts of storm to sectors or study areas
- Scale up for the whole city
- Develop the disaster risk reduction and adaptation action plan for Da Nang city

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Citywide
CCCO
100RC, CSIRO, International and national consultants (to be identified)
Relevant departments
2017-2020

Demonstration of VCAP for storm 
prone area in Tho Quang commune, 
CSIRO, May 2016.

4. ACTION 4.4
STRENGTHEN DISASTER MANAGEMENT DATABASES, INFRASTRUCTURE AND INFORMATION SYSTEM SAFETY
On the infrastructure side, much of Da Nang’s communication facilities are old, inconsistent, not well connected, and are ineffective 
for directing, commanding and connecting stakeholders. There is no contingency facility; shutdown of critical elements could result in 
complete system failure. Stakeholders, including community, organizations and communication companies, are not fully engaged in 
communicating disaster information. On the data side, a shortage of data and information reduces the quality of early warning. Data 
needs include: maps, sector planning, urban development planning, and social economic development, population distribution, past 
storm data inventories, forecasting, and fisheries development plans. Existing data has gaps, is sometimes out of date, and is 
scattered across multiple organizations and departments. Most of the data are available only in hard copy, significantly limiting their 
utility. This is key action and new initiative.

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS

LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Fire/EMS

Operation Center

Wildfire
Monitoring

Flood

Monitoring

CCTV
Interface

Review, assess existing infrastructures for disaster response at different levels
Develop proposal for a project to “Build the data and infrastructure for disaster management”
Develop the proposal of Cyber security for information system  of Da Nang city
Mobilize funding and implement the project

Citywide
DARD
International and national consultants (to be identified) in collaboration with Project “Smart Safety Center” initiated 
by Daegu city, sponsored by Korean Government.
CCCO, Office of the Committee for Storm and flood management, DIC, municipal departments
2017-2030

Demonstration of Disaster and Crisis Response Center 
“Da Nang Smart Safety Center” Project initiated by Deagu City, July 2016

Common Operating 
Picture Management

Video Sensor

Data Management

Resource
Management

Cooperation
Management

Relevant Office 

or Agency
Mass Media
and Schools

Evacuation
Broadcasting

58

RESILIENT   DA NANG  
5. ACTION 4.5
IMPROVE ACTION PLANS FOR TYPHOON PREPAREDNESS, RESPONSE, AND RECOVERY.
Improve action plans for typhoon preparedness, response, and recovery. This is a supportive action and the implemented activity 
needs to be updated. 

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS

TIME

Collect existing data, develop potential scenarios, propose responding actions
Consult with different stakeholders at different level
Integrate response plan into the Crisis Management System (CMS) to direct the response

Citywide
DARD
3S, International and national consultants (to be identified)
Office of the Committee for Storm and flood management, DIC, Center for Hydro-Meteorology forecast in 
Central Vietnam
2017-2025

6. ACTION 4.6
ENHANCE CITY OFFICER CAPACITY IN NATURAL DISASTER FORECASTING AND EARLY WARNING 
Enhance city officer capacity in natural disaster forecasting and early warning. This is a key action and ongoing activity that needs to be 
promoted.

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD
PLATFORM PARTNERS

LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Conduct survey and assessment, and develop an action plan for city officers on forecasting and early warning
Identify training needs and priorities
Implement the action plan (provide long-term, short term, and theme based training)

Citywide
Office of the Committee for Storm and flood management
International and national consultants (to be identified)
In collaboration with the project “Smart Safety Center” initiated by Daegu city, sponsored by Korean Government
Relevant municipal department, Center for Hydro-Meteorology forecast in Central Vietnam
2017-2020

7. ACTION 4.7
INVEST IN A HYDRO-METEOROLOGIC MONITORING AND EARLY WARNING SYSTEMS 
Early warning systems are needed for flood, flash flood and reservoir failures.  The limited number of hydrological monitoring stations 
on the Vu Gia – Han river system is insufficient to meet the need for water quality and flow monitoring, particularly at critical locations 
such as river junctions, narrowed sections, and before and after key infrastructure. Existing monitoring stations are primarily located 
on the Vu Gia river system – including the Yen river, Vinh Dien river, Qua Giang river, and Cau Do – Cam Le river. There is no flow 
monitoring station on the Tuy Loan or Cu De, two of Da Nang’s major rivers. This is a key action and is a new action which correlates 
to Strategy 3, Action “Planning and Urban Management.”  

Develop proposal and roadmap for investment of monitoring system, including:
- Build an early warning system for Tra Can reservoir
- Build warning systems linked to water level at Truoc Dong and Hoc Khe reservoirs
- Build one hydrologic monitoring station on each of the Tuy Loan and Cu De rivers.
- Develop the infrastructure needed to provide early warning for Tuy Loan and Cu De river floods and flash floods:
+ On Tuy Loan river: install six precipitation gauges in upstream area, install two automatic water level monitoring 
stations at Tuy Loan pump station and Dong Lam commune, Hoa Phu;
+ On Cu De river: install six precipitation gauges in upstream area, install two automatic water level monitoring 
stations at Cau Sap, Hoa Bac commune, and Truong Dinh bridge or Nam O Bridge.
- Build river flow monitoring stations at Ai Nghia and behind the discharge point of Dak Mi 4 hydro power plant.
- Build a system of monitoring stations for urban environmental quality (air, urban lakes, and wastewater).

Vu Gia – Han, Cu De, Tuy Loan river
DARD, DONRE
International and national consultants (to be identified)
In collaboration with the project “Smart Safety Center” initiated by Daegu city, sponsored by Korean Government
Relevant municipal department, Center for Hydro-Meteorology forecast in Central Vietnam
2017-2025

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD

PLATFORM PARTNERS

LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

60

RESILIENT   DA NANG  
8. ACTION 4.8
APPLY IT TO INCLUSIVELY COLLECT AND COMMUNICATE DISASTER INFORMATION
Timely, relevant disaster warning communication from ward people’s committees to communities is constrained by infrastructure and 
resource limitations. Post-disaster feedback from communities to higher levels (ward PC to district PC, district PC and departments to 
city PC) is not conducted well, particularly in reporting response activities, assessing damages and recording resource needs.  This is 
a supportive action and a new initiative.

9. ACTION 4.9
DEVELOP AN INCLUSIVE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM WITH DIVERSE COMMUNICATIONS CHANNELS
Engagement of social stakeholders is almost absent in communicating disaster information to communities. There are no regulations 
or policies on the integration of disaster warning into broadcasting, so residents receive disaster warning only on the national channels. 
Information is not promptly transferred to all people. Social network tools such as email, SMS and Facebook are not exploited well.  
This is a supportive action and a new concept.  

Develop mechanisms for information sharing during emergency situations
Provide wireless communication tools for off-shore boats.
Publish technical manuals for fisherman that provide guidance for emergency situations.
Pilot a community-based early warning system.
Build early warning systems for flash flood areas (Hoa Phu, Hoa Nhon, Hoa Phong, Hoa Ninh, Hoa Bac and Hoa 
Lien).
Provide training for communities on early warning process

Citywide
DARD
International and national consultants (to be identified)
Flood and Storm Management Bureau in Central region to pilot the community based flood warning model 
via text message
Relevant municipal department, Center for Hydro-Meteorology forecast in Central Vietnam
2017-2025

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD

PLATFORM PARTNERS

LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Conduct a survey on different channels for communication; propose relevant channels for disaster warning.
Conduct a survey on the digital service providers who could engage in the warning process
Provide incentives to encourage the engagement of providers
Generate MOUs between providers and local government to ensure provider engagement in emergency situations
Set up different channels to share information and provide feedback on disaster warning
Set up hotlines for emergency response, including landlines, cellphones, email
Improve communication, including: content, frequency, tools and channels that are relevant and familiar to the 
community.
Provide training to increase community awareness 

ACTIONS

RESILIENCE VALUE

TARGET AREA
LEAD

PLATFORM PARTNERS
LOCAL PARTNERS
TIME

Citywide
Office of the Committee for Storm and flood management
International and national consultants (to be identified)
Relevant municipal department, Center for Hydro-Meteorology forecast in Central Vietnam
2017-2025

62

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

5 - PARTNERSHIPS IN ACTION

100 Resilient Cities – Pioneered by The Rockefeller Foundation (100RC) is dedicated to helping cities around the world become 
more resilient to the physical, social and economic challenges that are a growing part of the 21st century. Da Nang City shares this 
commitment and has worked with 100RC and a range of partners to help develop its Resilience Strategy and implement actions. 
To that end, the city would like to recognize all the important partners who continue to play a key role in actively working to create 
a more resilient Da Dang.

TRANSFORMING 
THE WAY CITIES 
SOLVE PROBLEMS

64

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

6 - IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING

IMPLEMENTATION
This strategy is the very first document in Da Nang that aims to enhance city resilience to major shocks and stresses. The strategy 
is integrated with existing social-economic development strategies, climate change action planning, and urban planning to address 
resilience in Da Nang across elements and sectors, including adaptation and recovery capacity. Based on these analyses, actions 
and initiatives have been identified and prioritized to increase city resilience over the short-term, mid-term, and long-term.

The platform partners who have collaborated with the city of Da Nang in this work are indicated in the strategy. Da Nang expects to 
maintain relationships, support, and collaboration with platform partners in the future.

In the implementation phase, beginning in 2017, this resilience strategy will serve as the basis and guidance for municipal departments 
to implement proposed actions and initiatives. The strategy will also support those departments in playing their part in achieving city 
resilience goals by clearly communicating action objectives for each resilience initiative.

The CRO office will lead the resilience process, including communicating the strategy, collaborating with relevant departments, platform 
partners, and 100RC, and promoting the implementation of the strategy.  Specific tasks follow:

1. Closely collaborate with financial institutions, and technical consultants (WB, AFD, ADB, GRP, etc.) to mobilize resources  
    and implement high priority resilient actions/initiatives, specifically:
• Mobilize extended funding for storm resistant housing;
• Conduct research on financial mechanism for proactive disaster response;
• Maintain, protect, and recover natural ecosystems and buffers to increase floodwater storage and drainage capacity;
• Adjust urban planning towards sustainable development;
• Invest in hydro-meteorologic monitoring systems for flood early warning and environmental quality;
• Invest in data, data management and infrastructure for disaster response at all level;
• Begin integrated management of the Vu Gia Thu Bon river basin and for inter-regional development.

2. Develop work plans for the implementation phase, collaborate with 100RC and platform partners, mobilize resources 
    to implement four key initiatives, including:
• Efficient energy use in buildings: collaborate with WRI.
• Crisis management tool: collaborate with 3S.
• Visualize climate adaptation platform: collaborate with CSIRO.
• Insurance mechanisms for storm resistant housing: collaborate with Swiss Re.

3. Maintain and enhance the resources of the CRO Office to implement the Strategy and promote activities:
• Conduct outreach, communicate resilience concepts, and integrate resilience approach into planning and socio-economic 
  development plans and strategies, thus enhancing the implementation of resilience initiatives.
• Implement communications and awareness-raising programs on resilience in communities.
• Conduct surveys, interviews, and assessments on resilience in different phases. Develop action plans to increase the city’s resilience 
  index and address residual challenges.
• Maintain frequent discussions with 100RC on the implementation process, and collaborate with relevant partners and 100RC to solve 
  challenges that emerge during the implementation phase.

EXPECTED BUDGET
The budget will be mobilized from city funding and external donors (by 2020):

Expected Budget for Resilience Strategy Implementation

No.

1
2
3
4
5

Strategy Objective

Expense (million VND by 2020)

Strategy 1
Strategy 2
Strategy 3
Strategy 4
Management in 
implementation phase
Total

City funding
6,900
6,800
6,300 
5,800 
800

  26,600 

Others
7,200
7,620
45,000
25,500
1,200

86,520

The expected budget does not include investment in buildings and infrastructure. Budgets for each action can be found in Appendix 1.
MONITORING
Monitoring will help Da Nang track the current status of city resilience, the implementation of resilient building process, and the 
progress toward increased resilience. Monitoring will also allow for timely adjustment to the resilience implementation process.

In order to achieve outlined objectives and enhance the implementation process, the CRO office will develop a monitoring plan, 
conduct periodical assessment, and report performance results annually and in 5-year increments in 2020, 2025 and 2030 to the 
100RC Steering Committee and the People’s Committee. 

The CRO Office will also conduct surveys on the perception of resilience. This is to see the change in resilience perception in different 
project phases, and to identify gaps in resilience that need to be addressed in the future.

66

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

7 - REFERENCES AND CREDITS

REFERENCES
• Da Nang People’s committee, Social- Economic Development plan, 2016-2020, Da Nang (December 2015)
• Da Nang Party Committee and Quang Nam Party Committee, Conclusion 26/TUQN-TUDN on mutual support 
  and collaboration between Quang Nam and Da Nang (April 2016)
• Prime Minister, Adjustment on Da Nang Urban Planning to 2030 - vision 2015, 2013.
• Da Nang People’s committee, Environmental City Project (August 2008)
• Da Nang People’s committee, Proactive response to climate change, resource management, 
  and environmental protection (2014)
• Da Nang People’s committee, New Rural Area Project (November 2015))
• Da Nang People’s committee, Startup program (November 2015)

OTHER REFERENCES OF NOTE
• Page 15 graph; source: CCCO’s collection from previous reports 
• Page 16 table; References the Plan “Labour market development in Da Nang 2011-2020” (Ph.D. Ho Ky Minh 2011)
• Page 19 labor survey results of a survey among 200 laborers conducted by FA2 Working Group (May 2016) 
 
• Page 19 scenarios about climate change taken from the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (2012)
• Page 19 housing condition assessment taken from ADB’s research, ISET, July 2016
• Page 22 Resilience Analysis Tool sourced from CCCO, PRA and 100RC (December 2015)
• Page 46 Image from demonstration on water retentions along rivers to maximize drainage function;  
 
• Page 57 Images from demonstration of VCAP on the storm prone area in Tho Quang ward, CSIRO, May 2016

combined with results of a survey conducted by FA2 Working Group (May 2016)

FA3 Technical team (July 2016)

EDITORIAL PHOTO CREDITS
• Cover image; credit CPM PHOTO / Shutterstock.com
• Table of Contents image; credit Roman Babakin / Shutterstock.com
• Page 3 (top) image; editorial credit to Ovu0ng / Shutterstock.com
• Page 3 (middle-top) image; credit Nguyen Duc Luyen / Shutterstock.com
• Page 3 (middle-bottom) photo; credit Angela Ostafichuk / Shutterstock.com
• Page 3 (bottom) image; credit Hanoi Photography / Shutterstock.com
• Page 6 image; credit buocchankhongmoi / Shutterstock.com
• Page 8 (bottom left quadrant of CRF) credit amadeustx / Shutterstock.com
• Page 10 images; sourced from internet
• Page 12 image; credit to Bin An
• Page 14 image; credit EQRoy / Shutterstock.com
• Page 20 image; credit kontrast Design / Shutterstock.com
• Page 23-24 image; credit CPM PHOTO / Shutterstock.com
• Page 27 (top left) photo; credit Karasev Victor / Shutterstock.com
• Page 27 (top middle) photo; credit Hanoi Photography / Shutterstock.com
• Page 31-32 (bottom) image; credit Cuu Studio / Shutterstock.com
• Page 35 image; credit CPM PHOTO / Shutterstock.com
• Page 37 (top, middle) image; credit to Jimmy Tran / Shutterstock.com
• Page 38 (bottom) image; credit CPM PHOTO / Shutterstock.com
• Page 39 (bottom) photo; credit Daily Images / Shutterstock.com
• Page 42 (bottom) image; credit Arsenie Krasnevsky / Shutterstock.com
• Page 42 image; Source: DISED
• Page 43 image; credit Jimmy Tran / Shutterstock.com
• Page 46 (top left) image, credit xuanhuongho / Shutterstock.com
• Page 47 (bottom); credit Stephane Bidouze / Shutterstock.com
• Page 50 (top); credit Jimmy Tran / Shutterstock.com
• Page 56 (bottom) image; credit Marc van Vuren / Shutterstock.com
• Page 61-62 (bottom); credit Jimmy Tran / Shutterstock.com
• Page 63-64 background photo; credit Le Duong / Shutterstock.com
• Page 78 (bottom); credit Ovu0ng / Shutterstock.com
• Page 79-80; credit arisara chaorakam / Shutterstock.com
• Page 82 image; credit Thoai / Shutterstock.com

68

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

8 - APPENDICES

Appendix 1: 
TIMEFRAME AND EXPECTED BUDGET FOR IMPLEMENTATION (BY 2020)

No.

Strategy Action Description

Timeframe

Assignment

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021-
2025

2026-
2030

Lead

Platform 
partners

Local 
Partners

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

Objective 1

Expanding loan supports for 
community to build/ repair 
housing resilient to storms
Mobilize funding

Implement the loan 

Scaling up, integrating the 
technical material when 
building storm-resistant housing
Review existing regulations, 
designation drawings and 
construction guidance

Cooperating and handing 
over the deliverables to local 
units such as districts, wards/
communes
Organize training courses 
for local units

Assessing the city’s housing 
vulnerability exposed to storms 
(related to Strategic objective 
4) – Initially 
applying VCAP in produce 
disaster adaptation plans
Collect data in 56 communes

Develop map on storm
vulnerable areas 

Resilience 

Value

No.

Strategy Action Description

1.4

Research to integrate climate 
change mitigation into housing 
sector

Conduct assessment on current 
status and propose relevant 
solutions
Develop a roadmap and 
implement the solutions

1.5

Analysis on financial risk and 
insurance mechanism for 
disaster response

Conduct analysis and research 
on financial mechanism for 
proactive disaster response

1.6

Research and piloting the 
insurance mechanism for 
disaster resilient housing

Conduct research on housing 
insurance mechanism

Collaborate with financial insti-
tutions for funding, Consult the 
people committee and relevant 
stakeholders

Pilot the model (for 500 houses)

1.7

1.8

Promote training, propaganda, 
awareness raising, integrated 
education to improve resilience
Conduct training and workshop 
on critical skills for disaster 
response, Conduct training 
on resilience for students and 
workers, Develop guidance 
materials.

Promoting donors support for 
community based disaster and 
climate change responses
Assess and promote supports 
and sponsors

Timeframe

Assignment

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021-
2025

2026-
2030

Lead

Platform 
partners

Local 
Partners

Source (by 2020), 

Million VND
Others

City 
Budget

Resilience 

Value

CCCO

WRI, 100RC DOC, DIT

800

CCCO

WRI, 100RC DOC, DIT

Need to 
Identify

Need to 
Identify

CCCO, 
Municipal 
depart-
ments

100RC, 
Swiss Re/
VINARE
100RC, 
Swiss Re/
VINARE

Municipal 
depart-
ments
Municipal 
depart-
ments

300

100

300

100RC, 
Swiss Re/
VINARE

Municipal 
depart-
ments

600

3,000

DOF

CCCO

CCCO

CCCO

DOFA

Donors

4000

Municipal 
depart-
ments

Need to 
Identify

DoFA

Akzo Nobel

Depart-
ments

800

Need to 
Identify

70

Source (by 2020), 

Million VND
Others

City 
Budget
6,900

7,200

CCCO

100RC, ISET

DOF, WU

1,000

DOF

Municipal 
depart-
ments

To be 
identified

DOC

ISET

DOC

ISET

DOC

ISET

200

400

400

400

400

DOFA 
(ADB), 
CCCO, 
WU
CCCO, 
WU, 
DOFA

CCCO, 
WU, 
DOFA

100RC, 
CSRIO

100RC, 
CSRIO

Office 
of 
CSFM
Office 
of 
CSFM

District 
PC CCCO, 
DOC, DIC
CSIRO,
District 
PC CCCO, 
DOC, DIC

300

100

1000

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

No.

Strategy Action Description

2
2.1

2.2

Objective 2
Building and operating the 
Online Database of labor 
market
Build online database (inves-
tigate, develop the structure 
of the database, consult with 
different stakeholders, develop 
manual)
Publicize the database and 
update data
Assess and improve the system

Conducting dialogues on the 
issues related to labor, 
payment, recruitment, and 
training related to labor, pay-
ment, recruitment, and training
Assess the implementation of 
labor policy at businesses

Organize the dialogues 
engaging wide range of 
stakeholders

2.3

Piloting the distribution 
channels for organic products

Conduct survey and develop the 
proposal for Organic product 
distribution 

Conduct pilot model: develop 
and sign the MOU with produc-
er, invest in infrastructures, and 
organize the fair places

Assess the results and potential 
to scale up

Research on “Uber model for 
tourism services”
Conduct survey and develop the 
pilot model
Mobilize funding for piloting

Pilot the model, assess and 
replicate if success

2.4

Timeframe

Assignment

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021-
2025

2026-
2030

Lead

Platform 
partners

Local 
Partners

Source (by 2020), 

Million VND

City 
Budget
6,800

Others

7,620

Resilience 

Value

DOLISA Need to 
identify

 IZMB, 
District PC 

100

1,000

DOLISA Need to 
identify

DOLISA

IZMB, 
District PC
IZMB, 
District PC

100

200

1,000

DOLISA

DOLISA

DISED

DISED

200

200

DARD

Need to 
identify

 DARD

Need to 
identify

DISED

300

500

DISED

200

2,000

 DARD

300

Need to 
identify

DOT

DOT

DOT

DISED

DISED

DISED

300

1,000

Need to 
Identify
Need to 
Identify

No.

Strategy Action Description

2.5

Providing studying 
opportunity for children of 
workers in industrial zone
Implement the project of 
“Centre for kindergarten 
education and care”

Assess the effectiveness of 
the project

Develop a roadmap for 
scaling-up

2.6

Revitalizing the open spaces 
(park, foot path) at high 
density residential area.
Design the open space at Nai 
Hien Dong commune

Piloting on funding mobilizing 
mechanism for the open space 
at Nai Hien Dong commune

Conduct survey on current 
status and demand on open 
spaces, including kindergarten 
school, parks, particularly at 
Cam Le and Lien Chieu District.

Develop proposals to transform 
the abandoned areas into 
parks, footpath, and open 
spaces in industrial zones

Implement the proposals

2.7

Conducting dialogues with 
investors regarding the global 
economic integration

Implement the project “Central 
Focused Economic Zone” in Da 
Nang

Organize Economic and 
Investment Forums in Da Nang

Timeframe

Assignment

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021-
2025

2026-
2030

Lead Platform 
partners

Local 
Partners

Source (by 2020), 

Million VND
Others

City 
Budget

DOET

DOET

DOET

DOFA

Funded

Half 
the Sky 
Foundation

DOFA

100

DOFA

200

Need to 
Identify

CCCO

100RC, 
Citimart

Son Tra PC

120

Son 
Tra 
PC

DOC

DOC

DPI

DPI

100RC, 
Citimart

CCCO

Need to 
Identify

Municipal 
depart-
ments

Cam Le, 
Lien Chieu 
PC

300

1,000.00

300

1,000.00

Need to 
Identify

DISED, 
CCCO

2,000

Need to 
Identify

DISED, 
CCCO

2,000

Need to 
Identify

Resilience 

Value

72

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

No.

Strategy Action Description

Objective 3

3.1 Widening the flooding corridor 
and developing management 
mechanism
Conduct research and design the 
flooding corridor and related 
technical solutions
Set out the corridor border at site

3.2

Develop the policy for 
management and protection
Assessing the flooding risks in 
new urbanized areas
Collecting data, information on 
the available assessment

Assess the flooding risk

3.3

Adjust the detail plans which 
potentially impact the drainage 
capacity

Conduct researches  to adjust the 
design of buildings which inte-
grate  water retention function

Implement the solutions

3.4

Restructuring the urban form in 
high flood prone areas
Identify the degraded areas or 
inefficient land-used areas

Simulate urban development and 
flood to project flooding risks, 
design flood adaptive urban areas
Implement the solutions

3.5

Resettling residential areas which 
are located in flooding plain or 
frequently affected by flood
Conduct survey and research on 
alternatives for resettlement

Resettle the high risks areas

Timeframe

Assignment

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021-
2025

2026-
2030

Lead

Platform 
partners

Local 
Partners

Source (by 2020), 

Million VND

City 
Budget
6,300

Others

45,000

Resilience 

Value

DOC

DOC

DOC

DOC

DOC

DOC

DOC

DOC

DOC

DARD

DARD

Need to
Identify

DARD, 
DONRE, IUP

500

5,000

DARD, 
DONRE, IUP

DARD, 
DONRE, IUP

500

Need to
Identify

1,000

Need to
Identify

Municipal
depart-
ments
Municipal
depart-
ments

DARD, 
DONRE, IUP

DARD, 
DONRE, IUP

Municipal 
depart-
ments
Municipal 
depart-
ments
Municipal 
depart-
ments

Municipal
depart-
ments 
Municipal
depart-
ments 

300

5,000

500

3,000

Need to
Identify

 300

1000

3,000

Need to
Identify

300

1000

Need to
Identify

No.

Strategy Action Description

3.6

Piloting the safety community 
against flood

Conduct survey and research on 
safety community

Implement the solutions

3.7

Conducting research on Energy 
Efficiency in Buildings
implement the Energy Efficiency 
Accelerator sponsored by WRI: 
conduct survey, collect data, 
conduct analysis, and propose 
solutions
Scale up the solutions

3.8

Conducting research on Quang 
Nam – Da Nang interregional 
river basin plan

Conduct dialogues between 
Da Nang and Quang Nam to 
discuss on policy, mechanism, 
and working model of regional 
organization

Establish the river basin orga-
nization

3.9

Conducting research on 
regional urban plan and 
management mechanism

Conduct survey, research on 
regional plan

Develop the regional plan and 
management mechanism

Conduct dialogue, and 
implement the plan

Timeframe

Assignment

Source (by 2020), 

Million VND

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021-
2025

2026-
2030

Lead

Platform 
partners

Local 
Partners

City 
Budget

Others

Resilience 

Value

DARD

DARD

CCCO

WRI, 
100RC

CCCO

WRI, 
100RC

Municipal
depart-
ments 
Municipal 
depart-
ments

Municipal
depart-
ments 

Municipal
depart-
ments 

300

500

300

5,000

800

Need to
Identify

DONRE

100RC, 
ISET

DARD, DOC

400

2,000

DONRE

100RC, 
ISET

DARD, DOC

400

Need to
Identify

DOC

GRP (ISET) Municipal

200

2,000

depart-
ments 

DOC

GRP (ISET) Municipal 

200

2,000

depart-
ments

DOC

GRP (ISET) Municipal 

100

1,000

depart-
ments

74

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

No.

Strategy Action Description

3.10

3.11

3.12

Conducting GHG mitigation in 
waste treatment and tourism 
services
Conduct survey, research on 
potential solutions:

1. Transform Khanh Son landfill 
(old one) in to park or zoo (the 
landfill has been closed)
2. Solid waste classification at 
source
3. Solid waste treatment 
complex, including: recycling 
module, composting, energy 
collecting from incineration, 
hazardous waste classification 
and treatment 
4. GHG inventory for manufac-
turing and service sector

5. Using solar energy systems 
for service and tourism sectors

6. Waste water collection and 
treatment to minimize pollu-
tion at beaches
Promote investment and 
implementation
Implement the “Green Utility 
Network” in the Water Supply 
Sector
Conduct primary inventory to 
assess the energy and material 
efficiency

Develop the Climate change 
action plan (CCAP) for water 
supply sector
Share the results with 
international and national 
partners
Investing in monitoring system 
and early warning system 
(explain in objective 4)

Timeframe

Assignment

Source (by 2020), 

Million VND

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021-
2025

2026-
2030

Lead

Platform 
partners

Local 
Partners

City 
Budget

Others

Resilience 

Value

No.

Strategy Action Description

Timeframe

Assignment

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021-
2025

2026-
2030

Lead

Platform 
partners

Local 
Partners

Source (by 2020), 

Million VND
Others

City 
Budget
5,800.00

25,500

DONRE

To be 
identified

DARD, 
DOC

2,000

10,000

DONRE

DARD, 
DOC

Need to 
Identify

Need to 
Identify

DAWA-
CO

Vitens 
Evides

2,700

CCCO, 
Municipal 
depart-
ments
Municipal
depart-
ments

4
4.1

4.2

4.3

4.4

Objective 4
Strengthen the Disaster 
Management Center
Review the policy, regulation 
on the function and mandate 
of DMC.
Assess the current operation, 
capacity, and infrastructures for 
disaster management
Mobilize funding and support 
on capacity enhancing and 
facility investment
Piloting the crisis management 
system – CMS in flood 
management and response
Piloting the CMS in a commune 
in Hoa Vang district (develop 
the scenario, update the tool, 
conduct a drill)
Scale up and maintain

Assessing the vulnerability of  
housing to storm using VCAP
Develop proposal on the VCAP 
project in Da Nang
Mobilize funding

Develop the full version of VCAP

Strengthen the database and 
infrastructure for disaster 
management
Review, assess the existing 
infrastructures for disaster 
response at different level
Develop proposal for “Building 
database and infrastructure for 
disaster management”
Develop proposal for “Cyber 
security for information system 
in Da Nang”
Develop proposal for 
“Continuous operation Da 
Nang’s medical infrastructures”
Mobilize funding and 
implement the project

Resilience 

Value

76

DARD

DARD

Depart-
ments 

300

Depart-
ments

1,000

Need to 
Identify

CCCO

100RC, 3S

Office of 
CSFM

100

1,000

Office 
of 
CSFM

CCCO

CCCO

CCCO

DARD, 
DoH, 
DoIC
DARD

DoIC

DoH

DARD, 
DoH, 
DoIC

100RC, 3S

CCCO

300

3,000

100RC, 
CSIRO
100RC, 
CSIRO
100RC, 
CSIRO

Office of 
CSFM
Office of 
CSFM
Office of 
CSFM

Municipal 
depart-
ments
Municipal 
depart-
ments
Municipal 
depart-
ments
Municipal 
depart-
ments
Municipal 
depart-
ments

500

6,000

100

100

300

600

500

2,000

500

2,000

500

2,000

Need to 
Identify

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

No.

Strategy Action Description

4.5

Fulfilling scenarios for typhoon 
prevention, response, and 
recovery

Collect existing data, develop 
potential scenarios, propose 
responding actions

Consult with different 
stakeholders at different level

Training on the application of 
CMS

4.6

Enhancing capacity for city 
officers in analyzing data for 
natural disaster forecasting and 
warning

Assess, conduct survey, and de-
velop an action plan to enhance 
capacity

Implement the action plan

4.7

Investing in hydro-meteorology 
monitoring and early warning 
system for flood, flash flood and 
reservoir breakdown

Conduct research, survey, 
and design monitoring and 
early warning system on 
Vu Gia – Han river

Build the monitoring and early 
warning system

4.8

Applying IT in inclusive collect-
ing and communicating disaster 
information

Conduct survey and develop the 
online communication system

Implement the system (in 
collaboration with “Smart Safety 
Center” initiated by Deagu City

Timeframe

Assignment

Source (by 2020), 

Million VND

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021-
2025

2026-
2030

Lead

Platform 
partners

Local 
Partners

City 
Budget

Others

Resilience 

Value

No.

Strategy Action Description

4.9

5

Developing an inclusive 
communication system with 
diverse communication 
channels
Conduct survey on different 
channels for communication; 
propose relevant channels for 
disaster warning.
Provide incentives to encourage 
the engagement of providers, 
Set up different channels to 
share information, give 
feedback on disaster warning, 
Set up hotline for emergency 
response: landline, cellphone, 
email
Management on 
implementation phase:

200

2,000

100

1,000

DARD

DARD

DARD

DARD

DONRE, 
DARD

DONRE, 
DARD

Office 
of 
CSFM

Office 
of 
CSFM

Municipal
depart-
ments 

Municipal
depart-
ments 

Municipal
depart-
ments

Municipal
depart-
ments 

Municipal
depart-
ments 

DARD, 
DOC

DARD, 
DOC

Municipal
depart-
ments 

Municipal
depart-
ments 

200

1,000

Maintain CRO office

Conduct outreach activities on 
resilience
Conduct meeting with donors 
and partners to facilitate the 
implementation
Monitor implementation 
process and assess resilience
Participate other activities in 
the network
Total

Need to 
Identify

600

2,000

Need to 
Identify

1,000

Need to 
Identify

Timeframe

Assignment

Source (by 2020), 

Million VND

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021-
2025

2026-
2030

Lead

Platform 
partners

Local 
Partners

City 
Budget

Others

Resilience 

Value

Office 
of 
CSFM

Office 
of 
CSFM

200

1,000

200

1,000

Municipal
depart-
ments 

Municipal
depart-
ments 

CCCO

100RC, WRI Municipal

800

1,200

depart-
ments 
Municipal 
depart-
ments

26,600

86,520

78

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

Appendix 2: 
STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT TEAM MEMBERS

STRATEGY PARTNER

Dr. Trần Văn Giải Phóng, ISET 
Dr. Stephen Tyler, ISET
Dr. Karen MacClune, ISET
Dr. Trần Tuấn Anh, ISET

STRATEG Y COMPOSING TEAM

Dr. Đinh Quang Cường, CCCO
Mrs. Nguyễn Thị Kim Hà, CCCO
Mr. Huỳnh Huy Hòa, DISED
Mrs. Phan Thị Hiền, Agency of Environmental Protection
Mrs. Phạm Thị Mai Vân, DIP

FA1 WORKING GROUP

Mrs. Vũ Thị Mai Hương, CCCO
Mr. Thái Văn Quang, DARD
Mrs. Nguyễn Thị Thu Hương, DOLISA
Mr. Nguyễn Anh Tuấn

FA2 WORKING GROUP

Mrs. Trịnh Thị Minh Hải, CCCO
Mrs. Quách Thị Xuân, DISED
Mr. Võ Văn Tiến, DOLISA
Mrs. Trần Như Quỳnh, DISED

FA3 WORKING GROUP

Mr. Phan Minh Quý, CCCO
Mr. Huỳnh Việt Thành
Mr. Nguyễn Hải Đường, DOC
Mr. Trần Viết Dũng, DOC

FA4 WORKING GROUP

FA4 Working Group
Mr. Lê Quang Việt, CCCO
Mr. Huỳnh Vạn Thắng
Mr. Lê Duy Vọng
Mr. Nguyễn Anh Tuấn

80

RESILIENT   DA NANG  

Appendix 3: 
RESILIENCE LENS & QUALITIES

RESILIENCE LENS
The Resilience Lens is a fundamental diagnostic tool used to identify and evaluate options, helping CRO and teams to make decisions and 
trade-offs and ensure maximum resilience benefit. Resilience Lens guidance (to be used in conjunction with the CRF):

1. Does this proposed plan, or action, approach risks and vulnerabilities in an integrated and comprehensive way using the CRF?

2. Does this proposed plan, or action, consider impacts of multiple shocks and stresses identified through a risk and hazard assessment? 

3. Have the short, medium and long-term direct and indirect benefits (and negative impacts) of the proposed action or plan been identified?

4. Does this proposed plan or action incorporate the relevant qualities of resilience?

5. Does this proposed plan, or action, aim for broadly equitable outcomes?

6. Does this proposed plan, or action, leverage the ability and capacities of a broad group of stakeholders?

7. Does this proposed plan, or action, take into consideration cross-jurisdictional implications (i.e. Intercity/regional/national)?

RESILIENCE QAULITIES
The Resilience Qualities are characteristics of resilience systems and cities, and are a key element of the 100RC City Resilience 
Framework. Not all Qualities are relevant to a given system or actions. However, 100RC recommends that each Focus Area Working 
Group uses these Qualities as they deem most appropriate, in order to advance thinking and decision-making in each Focus Area.

Reflective: Reflective systems are accepting of the inherent and ever-increasing uncertainty and change in today’s world. 

Robust: Robust systems include well-conceived, constructed and managed physical assets.

Redundant: Redundancy refers to spare capacity purposely created within systems so that they can accommodate disruption.

Flexible: Flexibility implies that systems can change, evolve and adapt in response to changing circumstances

Resourceful: Resourcefulness implies that people and institutions are able to rapidly find different ways to achieve their goals or meet 
their needs during a shock or when under stress. 

Inclusive: Inclusion emphasizes the need for broad consultation and engagement of communities, including the most vulnerable 
groups. 

Integrated: Integration and alignment between city systems promotes consistency in decision-making 
and ensures that all investments are mutually supportive to a common outcome.

82

DA NANG

